Gen. 2:1 Thus the heavens and the earth and everything in them were completed.
2 On the sixth day God brought to an end all the work he had been doing; on the seventh day, having finished all his work, 3 God blessed the day and made it
holy, because it was the day he finished all his work of creation. 4 This is
the story of the heavens and the earth after their creation.
 When the Lord God made the earth and the heavens, 5 there was neither shrub
nor plant growing on the earth, because the Lord God had sent no rain; nor was
there anyone to till the ground. 6 Moisture used to well up out of the earth
and water all the surface of the ground.
Gen. 2:7 The Lord God formed a human being from the dust of the ground and
breathed into his nostrils the breath of life, so that he became a living
creature. 8 The Lord God planted a garden in Eden away to the east, and in it
he put the man he had formed. 9 The Lord God made trees grow up from the
ground, every kind of tree pleasing to the eye and good for food; and in the
middle of the garden he set the tree of life and the tree of the knowledge of
good and evil.
Gen. 2:10 There was a river flowing from Eden to water the garden, and from
there it branched into four streams. 11 The name of the first is Pishon; it is
the river which skirts the whole land of Havilah, where gold is found. 12 The
gold of that land is good; gum resin and cornelians are also to be found there.
13 The name of the second river is Gihon; this is the one which skirts the whole
land of Cush. 14 The name of the third is Tigris; this is the river which flows
east of Asshur. The fourth river is the Euphrates.
Gen. 2:15 The Lord God took the man and put him in the garden of Eden to till
it and look after it. 16 ‘You may eat from any tree in the garden’, he told the
man, 17 ‘except from the tree of the knowledge of good and evil; the day you
eat from that, you are surely doomed to die.’ 18 Then the Lord God said, ‘It is
not good for the man to be alone; I shall make a partner suited to him.’ 19 So
from the earth he formed all the wild animals and all the birds of the air, and
brought them to the man to see what he would call them; whatever the man called
each living creature, that would be its name. 20 The man gave names to all
cattle, to the birds of the air, and to every wild animal; but for the man
himself no suitable partner was found. 21 The Lord God then put the man into a
deep sleep and, while he slept, he took one of the man’s ribs and closed up the
flesh over the place. 22 The rib he had taken out of the man the Lord God built
up into a woman, and he brought her to the man. 23 The man said: ‘This one at
last is bone from my bones, flesh from my flesh! She shall be called woman, for
from man was she taken.’ 24 That is why a man leaves his father and mother and
attaches himself to his wife, and the two become one. 25 Both were naked, the
man and his wife, but they had no feeling of shame.

