Gen. 1:1 In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth. 2 The earth
was a vast waste, darkness covered the deep, and the spirit of God hovered over
the surface of the water. 3 God said, ‘Let there be light,’ and there was
light; 4 and God saw the light was good, and he separated light from darkness.
5 He called the light day, and the darkness night. So evening came, and morning
came; it was the first day.
Gen. 1:6 God said, ‘Let there be a vault between the waters, to separate water
from water.’ 7 So God made the vault, and separated the water under the vault
from the water above it, and so it was; 8 and God called the vault the heavens.
Evening came, and morning came, the second day.
Gen. 1:9 God said, ‘Let the water under the heavens be gathered into one
place, so that dry land may appear’; and so it was. 10 God called the dry land
earth, and the gathering of the water he called sea; and God saw that it was
good. 11 Then God said, ‘Let the earth produce growing things; let there be on
the earth plants that bear seed, and trees bearing fruit each with its own kind
of seed.’ So it was; 12 the earth produced growing things: plants bearing their
own kind of seed and trees bearing fruit, each with its own kind of seed; and
God saw that it was good. 13 Evening came, and morning came, the third day.
Gen. 1:14 God said, ‘Let there be lights in the vault of the heavens to
separate day from night, and let them serve as signs both for festivals and for
seasons and years. 15 Let them also shine in the heavens to give light on
earth.’ So it was; 16 God made two great lights, the greater to govern the day
and the lesser to govern the night; he also made the stars. 17 God put these
lights in the vault of the heavens to give light on earth, 18 to govern day and
night, and to separate light from darkness; and God saw that it was good. 19
Evening came, and morning came, the fourth day.
Gen. 1:20 God said, ‘Let the water teem with living creatures, and let birds
fly above the earth across the vault of the heavens.’ 21 God then created the
great sea-beasts and all living creatures that move and swarm in the water,
according to their various kinds, and every kind of bird; and God saw that it
was good. 22 He blessed them and said, ‘Be fruitful and increase; fill the
water of the sea, and let the birds increase on the land.’ 23 Evening came, and
morning came, the fifth day.
Gen. 1:24 God said, ‘Let the earth bring forth living creatures, according to
their various kinds: cattle, creeping things, and wild animals, all according to
their various kinds.’ So it was; 25 God made wild animals, cattle, and every
creeping thing, all according to their various kinds; and he saw that it was
good. 26 Then God said, ‘Let us make human beings in our image, after our
likeness, to have dominion over the fish in the sea, the birds of the air, the
cattle, all wild animals on land, and everything that creeps on the earth.’ 27
God created human beings in his own image; in the image of God he created them;
male and female he created them. 28 God blessed them and said to them, ‘Be
fruitful and increase, fill the earth and subdue it, have dominion over the fish
in the sea, the birds of the air, and every living thing that moves on the
earth.’ 29 God also said, ‘Throughout the earth I give you all plants that bear
seed, and every tree that bears fruit with seed: they shall be yours for food.
30 All green plants I give for food to the wild animals, to all the birds of the
air, and to everything that creeps on the earth, every living creature.’ So it
was; 31 and God saw all that he had made, and it was very good. Evening came,
and morning came, the sixth day. 

