Gen. 6:1 The human race began to increase and to spread over the earth and
daughters were born to them. 2 The sons of the gods saw how beautiful these
daughters were, so they took for themselves such women as they chose. 3 But the
Lord said, ‘My spirit will not remain in a human being for ever; because he is
mortal flesh, he will live only for a hundred and twenty years.’
Gen. 6:4 In those days as well as later, when the sons of the gods had
intercourse with the daughters of mortals and children were born to them, the
Nephilim were on the earth; they were the heroes of old, people of renown. 
Gen. 6:5 When the Lord saw how great was the wickedness of human beings on
earth, and how their every thought and inclination were always wicked, 6 he
bitterly regretted that he had made mankind on earth. 7 He said, ‘I shall wipe
off the face of the earth this human race which I have created—yes, man and
beast, creeping things and birds. I regret that I ever made them.’ 8 Noah,
however, had won the Lord’s favour.
Gen. 6:9 This is the story of Noah. Noah was a righteous man, the one
blameless man of his time, and he walked with God. 10 He had three sons: Shem,
Ham, and Japheth. 11 God saw that the world was corrupt and full of violence;
12 and seeing this corruption, for the life of everyone on earth was corrupt,
13 God said to Noah, ‘I am going to bring the whole human race to an end, for
because of them the earth is full of violence. I am about to destroy them, and
the earth along with them. 14 Make yourself an ark with ribs of cypress; cover
it with reeds and coat it inside and out with pitch. 15 This is to be its
design: the length of the ark is to be three hundred cubits, its breadth fifty
cubits, and its height thirty cubits. 16 You are to make a roof for the ark,
giving it a fall of one cubit when complete; put a door in the side of the ark,
and build three decks, lower, middle, and upper. 17 I am about to bring the
waters of the flood over the earth to destroy from under heaven every human
being that has the spirit of life; everything on earth shall perish. 18 But
with you I shall make my covenant, and you will go into the ark, you with your
sons, your wife, and your sons’ wives. 19 You are to bring living creatures of
every kind into the ark to keep them alive with you, two of each kind, a male
and a female; 20 two of every kind of bird, beast, and creeping thing are to
come to you to be kept alive. 21 See that you take and store by you every kind
of food that can be eaten; this will be food for you and for them.’ 22 Noah
carried out exactly all God had commanded him. 

