Gen. 7:1 The Lord said to Noah, ‘Go into the ark, you and all your household;
for you lone in this generation have I found to be righteous. 2 Take with you
seven pairs, a male and female, of all beasts that are ritually clean, and one
pair, a male and female, of all beasts that are not clean; 3 also seven pairs,
males and females, of every bird—to ensure that life continues on earth. 4 For
in seven days’ time I am going to send rain on the earth for forty days and
forty nights, and I shall wipe off the face of the earth every living creature I
have made.’ 5 Noah did all that the Lord had commanded him. 6 He was six
hundred years old when the water of the flood came on the earth.
Gen. 7:7 So to escape the flood Noah went into the ark together with his sons,
his wife, and his sons’ wives. 8 [-9] And to him on board the ark went one
pair, a male and a female, of all beasts, clean and unclean, of birds, and of
everything that creeps on the ground, two by two, as God had commanded. 10 At
the end of seven days the water of the flood came over the earth. 11 In the
year when Noah was six hundred years old, on the seventeenth day of the second
month, that very day all the springs of the great deep burst out, the windows of
the heavens were opened, 12 and rain fell on the earth for forty days and forty
nights. 13 That was the day Noah went into the ark with his sons, Shem, Ham,
and Japheth, his own wife, and his three sons’ wives. 14 Wild animals of every
kind, cattle of every kind, every kind of thing that creeps on the ground, and
winged birds of every kind— 15 all living creatures came two by two to Noah in
the ark. 16 Those which came were one male and one female of all living things;
they came in as God had commanded Noah, and the Lord closed the door on him.
Gen. 7:17 The flood continued on the earth for forty days, and the swelling
waters lifted up the ark so that it rose high above the ground. 18 The ark
floated on the surface of the swollen waters as they increased over the earth.
19 They increased more and more until they covered all the high mountains
everywhere under heaven. 20 The water increased until the mountains were
covered to a depth of fifteen cubits. 21 Every living thing that moved on earth
perished: birds, cattle, wild animals, all creatures that swarm on the ground,
and all human beings. 22 Everything on dry land died, everything that had the
breath of life in its nostrils. 23 God wiped out every living creature that 
existed on earth, man and beast, creeping thing and bird; they were all wiped
out over the whole earth, and only Noah and those who were with him in the ark
survived.
Gen. 7:24 When the water had increased over the earth for a hundred and fifty
days, 

