Gen. 8:1 God took thought for Noah and all the beasts and cattle with him in
the ark, and he caused a wind to blow over the earth, so that the water began to
subside. 2 The springs of the deep and the windows of the heavens were stopped
up, the downpour from the skies was checked. 3 Gradually the water receded from
the earth, and by the end of a hundred and fifty days it had abated. 4 On the
seventeenth day of the seventh month the ark grounded on the mountains of
Ararat. 5 The water continued to abate until the tenth month, and on the first
day of the tenth month the tops of the mountains could be seen.
Gen. 8:6 At the end of forty days Noah opened the hatch that he had made in
the ark, 7 and sent out a raven; it continued flying to and fro until the water
on the earth had dried up. 8 Then Noah sent out a dove to see whether the water
on the earth had subsided. 9 But the dove found no place where she could settle
because all the earth was under water, and so she came back to him in the ark.
Noah reached out and caught her, and brought her into the ark. 10 He waited
seven days more and again sent out the dove from the ark. 11 She came back to
him towards evening with a freshly plucked olive leaf in her beak. Noah knew
then that the water had subsided from the earth’s surface. 12 He waited yet
another seven days and, when he sent out the dove, she did not come back to him.
13 So it came about that, on the first day of the first month of his six hundred
and first year, the water had dried up on the earth, and when Noah removed the
hatch and looked out, he saw that the ground was dry.
Gen. 8:14 By the twenty-seventh day of the second month the earth was dry, 15
and God spoke to Noah. 16 ‘Come out of the ark together with your wife, your
sons, and their wives,’ he said. 17 ‘Bring out every living creature that is
with you, live things of every kind, birds, beasts, and creeping things, and let
them spread over the earth and be fruitful and increase on it.’ 18 So Noah came
out with his sons, his wife, and his sons’ wives, 19 and all the animals,
creeping things, and birds; everything that moves on the ground came out of the
ark, one kind after another.
Gen. 8:20 Noah built an altar to the Lord and, taking beasts and birds of
every kind that were ritually clean, he offered them as whole-offerings on it.
21 When the Lord smelt the soothing odour, he said within himself, ‘Never again
shall I put the earth under a curse because of mankind, however evil their
inclination may be from their youth upwards, nor shall I ever again kill all
living creatures, as I have just done. 22 ‘As long as the earth lasts, seedtime
and harvest, cold and heat, summer and winter, day and night, they will never
cease.’ 
