Gen. 9:1 God blessed Noah and his sons; he said to them, ‘Be fruitful and
increase in numbers, and fill the earth. 2 Fear and dread of you will come on
all the animals on earth, on all the birds of the air, on everything that moves
on the ground, and on all fish in the sea; they are made subject to you. 3
Every creature that lives and moves will be food for you; I give them all to
you, as I have given you every green plant. 4 But you must never eat flesh with
its life still in it, that is the blood. 5 And further, for your life-blood I
shall demand satisfaction; from every animal I shall require it, and from human
beings also I shall require satisfaction for the death of their fellows. 6
‘Anyone who sheds human blood, for that human being his blood will be shed;
because in the image of God has God made human beings. 7 ‘Be fruitful, then,
and increase in number; people the earth and rule over it.’
Gen. 9:8 God said to Noah and his sons: 9 ‘I am now establishing my covenant
with you and with your descendants after you, 10 and with every living creature
that is with you, all birds and cattle, all the animals with you on earth, all 
Gen. 9:12 God said, ‘For all generations to come, this is the sign which I am
giving of the covenant between myself and you and all living creatures with you:
13 My bow I set in the clouds to be a sign of the covenant between myself and
the earth. 14 When I bring clouds over the earth, the rainbow will appear in
the clouds. 15 ‘Then I shall remember the covenant which I have made with you
and with all living creatures, and never again will the waters become a flood to
destroy all creation. 16 Whenever the bow appears in the cloud, I shall see it
and remember the everlasting covenant between God and living creatures of every
kind on earth.’ 17 So God said to Noah, ‘This is the sign of the covenant which
I have established with all that lives on earth.’
Gen. 9:18 The sons of Noah who came out of the ark were Shem, Ham, and
Japheth; Ham was the father of Canaan. 19 These three were the sons of Noah,
and their descendants spread over the whole earth. 
Gen. 9:20 Noah, who was the first tiller of the soil, planted a vineyard. 21
He drank so much of the wine that he became drunk and lay naked inside his tent.
22 Ham, father of Canaan, saw his father naked, and went out and told his two
brothers. 23 Shem and Japheth took a cloak, put it on their shoulders, and,
walking backwards, covered their father’s naked body. They kept their faces
averted, so that they did not see his nakedness. 24 When Noah woke from his
drunkenness and learnt what his youngest son had done to him, 25 he said:
‘Cursed be Canaan! Most servile of slaves shall he be to his brothers.’ 26 And
he went on: ‘Bless, O Lord, the tents of Shem; may Canaan be his slave. 27 May
God extend Japheth’s boundaries, let him dwell in the tents of Shem, may Canaan
be his slave.’ 28 After the flood Noah lived for three hundred and fifty years;
29 he was nine hundred and fifty years old when he died. 

