Gen. 11:1 There was a time when all the world spoke a single language and used
the same words. 

2 As people journeyed in the east, they came upon a plain in
the land of Shinar and settled there. 3 They said to one another, ‘Come, let us
make bricks and bake them hard’; 

they used bricks for stone and bitumen for
mortar. 4 Then they said, ‘Let us build ourselves a city and a tower with its
top in the heavens and make a name for ourselves, 

or we shall be dispersed over
the face of the earth.’ 5 The Lord came down to see the city and tower which
they had built, 6 and he said, ‘Here they are, one people with a single
language, and now they have started to do this; from now on nothing they have a
mind to do will be beyond their reach. 

7 Come, let us go down there and confuse
their language, so that they will not understand what they say to one another.’
8 So the Lord dispersed them from there all over the earth, and they left off
building the city. 9 That is why it is called Babel, because there the Lord
made a babble of the language of the whole world. It was from that place the



Lord scattered people over the face of the earth.
Gen. 11:10 These are the descendants of Shem. Shem was a hundred years old
when he begot Arphaxad, two years after the flood. 11 After the birth of
Arphaxad he lived five hundred years, and had other sons and daughters. 12
Arphaxad was thirty-five years old when he begot Shelah. 13 After the birth of
Shelah he lived four hundred and three years, and had other sons and daughters.
Gen. 11:14 Shelah was thirty years old when he begot Eber. 15 After the birth
of Eber he lived four hundred and three years, and had other sons and daughters.


Gen. 11:16 Eber was thirty-four years old when he begot Peleg. 17 After the
birth of Peleg he lived four hundred and thirty years, and had other sons and
daughters.
Gen. 11:18 Peleg was thirty years old when he begot Reu. 19 After the birth
of Reu he lived two hundred and nine years, and had other sons and daughters.
Gen. 11:20 Reu was thirty-two years old when he begot Serug. 21 After the
birth of Serug he lived two hundred and seven years, and had other sons and
daughters.
Gen. 11:22 Serug was thirty years old when he begot Nahor. 23 After the birth
of Nahor he lived two hundred years, and had other sons and daughters.
Gen. 11:24 Nahor was twenty-nine years old when he begot Terah. 25 After the
birth of Terah he lived a hundred and nineteen years, and had other sons and
daughters.

Gen. 11:26 Terah was seventy years old when he begot Abram, Nahor, and Haran. 
Gen. 11:27 These are the descendants of Terah. Terah was the father of Abram,
Nahor, and Haran. Haran was Lot’s father. 28 Haran died in the land of his
birth, Ur of the Chaldees, during his father’s lifetime. 29 Abram and Nahor
married wives; Abram’s wife was called Sarai, and Nahor’s Milcah. She was the
daughter of Haran, father of Milcah and Iscah. 30 Sarai was barren; she had no
child. 31 Terah took his son Abram, his grandson Lot the son of Haran, and his
daughter-in-law Sarai, Abram’s wife, and they set out from Ur of the Chaldees
for Canaan. But when they reached Harran, they settled there. 32 Terah was two 
hundred and five years old when he died in Harran. 

