Core, Distribution, and Access
If you have ever taken a networking class or read a book about network design, you have

probably heard the terms core, distribution, and access when referring to networking architecture. Proper network design is imperative no matter what type of network topology is

used. The core of the network is the high-speed backbone or the superhighway of the network. The goal of the core is to carry large amounts of information between key data centers or distribution areas, just as superhighways connect cities and metropolitan areas.

The core layer does not route traffi c or manipulate packets but rather performs high-speed switching. Redundant solutions are usually designed at the core layer to ensure the

fast and reliable delivery of packets. The distribution layer of the network routes or directs
traffi c toward the smaller clusters of nodes or neighborhoods of the network.
The distribution layer routes traffi c between virtual LANs (VLANs) and subnets. The
distribution layer is akin to the state and county roads that provide medium travel speeds
and distribute the traffi c within the city or metropolitan area.
The access layer of the network is responsible for slower delivery of the traffi c directly to
the end user or end node. The access layer mimics the local roads and neighborhood streets

that are used to reach your fi nal address. The access layer ensures the fi nal delivery of packets to the end user. Remember that speed is a relative concept.

Because of traffi c load and throughput demands, speed and throughput capabilities
increase as data moves from the access layer to the core layer. The additional speed and
throughput tends to also mean higher cost.
Just as it would not be practical to build a superhighway so that traffi c could travel
between your neighborhood and the local school, it would not be practical or effi cient to
build a two-lane road as the main thoroughfare to connect two large cities such as

New York and Boston. These same principles apply to network design. Each of the network

layers—core, distribution, and access—is designed to provide a specifi c function and capability to the network. It is important to understand how wireless networking fi ts into this

network design model.
Wireless networking can be implemented as either point-to-point or point-to-multipoint

solutions. Most wireless networks are used to provide network access to the individual client stations and are designed as point-to-multipoint networks. This type of impementation

is designed and installed on the access layer, providing connectivity to the end user. 802.11
wireless networking is most often implemented at the access layer. In Chapter 10, “WLAN

Architecture,” you will learn about the difference between autonomous access points, cooperative access points, and controller-based access points. All access points are deployed at

the access layer; however, controller-based access points commonly tunnel 802.11 wireless
traffi c to WLAN controllers, which are normally deployed at the distribution or core layer.
Wireless bridge links are typically used to provide connectivity between buildings in the
same way that county or state roads provide distribution of traffi c between neighborhoods.
The purpose of wireless bridging is to connect two separate, wired networks wirelessly.
Routing data traffi c between networks is usually associated with the distribution layer.
Wireless bridge links cannot usually meet the speed or distance requirements of the core
layer, but they can be very effective at the distribution layer. An 802.11 bridge link is an
example of wireless technology being implemented at the distribution layer.
Although wireless is not typically associated with the core layer, you must remember
that speed and distance requirements vary greatly between large and small companies and

that one person’s distribution layer could be another person’s core layer. Very small companies may even implement wireless for all end-user networking devices, forgoing any wired

devices except for the connection to the Internet. Higher-bandwidth proprietary wireless

bridges and some 802.11 mesh network deployments could be considered an implementation of wireless at the core layer.
