Amplitude and Wavelength
RF communication starts when radio waves are generated from an RF transmitter and
picked up, or “heard,” by a receiver at another location. RF waves are similar to the waves
that you see in an ocean or lake. Waves are made up of two main components: wavelength
and amplitude (see Figure 1.5).
FIGURE
This drawing shows the wavelength and amplitude of a wave
Wavelength (360 degrees
Amplitude Amplitude is the height, force, or power of the wave. If you were standing in
the ocean as the waves came to shore, you would feel the force of a larger wave much more
than you would a smaller wave. Transmitters do the same thing, but with radio waves.
Smaller waves are not as noticeable as bigger waves. A bigger wave generates a much larger
electrical signal picked up by the receiving antenna. The receiver can then distinguish
between highs and lows.
Wavelength Wavelength is the distance between similar points on two back-to-back
waves. When measuring a wave, the wavelength is typically measured from the peak of a
wave to the peak of the next wave. Amplitude and wavelength are both properties of waves.
Frequency
Frequency describes a behavior of waves. Waves travel away from the source that generates
them. How fast the waves travel, or more specifi cally, how many waves are generated over
a 1-second period of time, is known as frequency. If you were to sit on a pier and count
how often a wave hits it, you could tell someone how frequently the waves were coming to
shore. Think of radio waves in the same way; however, radio waves travel much faster than
the waves in the ocean. If you were to try to count the radio waves that are used in wireless
networking, in the time it would take for one wave of water to hit the pier, several billion
radio waves would have also hit the pier.
Phase
Phase is a relative term. It is the relationship between two waves with the same frequency.
To determine phase, a wavelength is divided into 360 pieces referred to as degrees (see
Figure 1.6). If you think of these degrees as starting times, then if one wave begins at the 0
degree point and another wave begins at the 90 degree point, these waves are considered to
be 90 degrees out of phase.

FIGURE 1 . 6 This drawing shows two waves that are identical; however, they are 90
degrees out of phase with each other.
Degrees
In an ideal world, waves are created and transmitted from one station and received perfectly intact at another station. Unfortunately, RF communications do not occur in an ideal
world. There are many sources of interference and many obstacles that will affect the wave
in its travels to the receiving station. In Chapter 2, we will introduce you to some of the
outside infl uences that can affect the integrity of a wave and your ability to communicate
between two stations.
Time and Phase
Suppose you have two stopped watches and both are set to noon. At noon you start
your fi rst watch, and then you start your second watch 1 hour later. The second watch is
1 hour behind the fi rst watch. As time goes by, your second watch will continue to be 1
hour behind. Both watches will maintain a 24-hour day, but they are out of sync with each
other. Waves that are out of phase behave similarly. Two waves that are out of phase are
essentially two waves that have been started at two different times. Both waves will
complete full 360-degree cycles, but they will do it out of phase, or out of sync with
each other.
