Mastering STM32
---------------
Arduino is not a given MCU family or a silicon manufacturer. It is both a brand
and an ecosystem. There are tens of Arduino development boards available on the
market, even if it is common to refer to Arduino UNO board as "the Arduino".
Arduino UNO is a development board built around the ATMega328, an 8 bit microcontroller
designed by Atmel. Atmel is one of the leading companies, together with Microchip,
that rule the 8-bit MCU segment.

I think Python is an expressive and productive programming language, and it is
always my first choice when I have to code something.
I found myself slingshot into a world I had always considered obscure: electronics.

ARM = reduced introduction set computing (RISC).

ARM architecture is a set of specifications regarding the instruction set,
the execution model, the memory organization and layout, the instruction cycles
and more.

Cortex-M is a family of physical cores designed to be further integrated with
vendor-specific silicon devices to form a finished microcontroller.
The way a core works is not only defined by its related ARM architecture, but
also by integrated peripherals and hardware capabilities defined by the silicon
manufacturer.
STM32F4 is a family of MCUs based on the Cortex-M4.


ARM Cortex is a wide set of 32 and 64 bit architectures and cores really popular
in the embedded world. Cortex microcontrollers are divided into three main subfamilies:
    - Cortex-A  Application (TI or Freescale)
    - Cortex-M  eMbedded - energy efficien - ST Microelectronics
    - Cortex-R  Real-Time

Cortex-M - fixed memory address space.

Thumb - 2 and memory alignment

(Cortex Microcontroller Software Interface Standard)
CMSIS-CORE   = API for the Cortex-M processor core and peripherals.
CMSIS-Driver = 
CMSIS-DSP


IDE: IAR for Cortex-M and Keil - commercial. >5,000$

CooCox and System Workbench for STM32 (SW4STM32) on Eclipse and GCC.

OpenOCD is a tool that allows to upload the firmware on the Nucleo board.


STM32CubeMX Tool

GDB remove protocol port 3333, telnet port 4444
OpenOCD (ST-Link Driver)
ST-LINK










