The big question of this segment, is what
is the relationship between historical and scientific explanation? [MUSIC] So what are the differences
between history and science? What kind of differences are there
between scientific explanations and historical explanations. Are there any scientific disciplines
that use historical methodology? So, can we talk about historical science? And what would a grand historical
narrative of scientific explanation look like, and is that something that the big
history project can really pull off? Is history an art or a science? Well, it has elements of both, because
historians obviously appeal to evidence. They're interested in things like
documents, and artifacts and so on. So of course in that sense,
history is empirical, but historical explanations are also
narrative explanations. They explain how some event came about, by describing the sequence
of events that led to it. Okay so now, what kind of differences
are there between historical and scientific explanations? Well, there are differences between
scientific and historical explanations. The sciences for example,
involve experimentation, but they also produce theoretical models
that include laws, or generalizations, concerning the nature and
behavior of physical phenomena. So that idea of modeling reality and
testing the model by controlled experiment, Is crucial to scientific
reasoning and explanation. So another kind of difference
that's important is that science is also involved making
predictions and testing them. So in that sense history isn't
precisely a predictive science, of course it's really
concerned with the past. So one might ask. Well look, don't historians make
predictions about the future based on past events. Well, yeah they do, but not in the controlled experimental
sense of the sciences. However, I'm not trying to force a
complete discontinuity between history and science here,
because some sciences are historical. And it's clear that some sciences
involve historical explanations, biology and particularly evolutionary
biology being an obvious example. So evolutionary explanations are
historical because they show us how for example a trait, a biological
trait gradually evolved over time. So take as an example the gradual
evolution of the complex mechanism that is the eye. The eye has evolved through
the action of natural selection resulting in an exquisitely
adapted mechanism. So evolutionary explanations as
historical explanations are important and it's important that we get them right, so
they need to avoid being just so stories. So what I mean by just so stories, is the need to avoid merely plausible
stories about how a trait evolved. Famously two biologists, Stephen Gould and Richard Lewontin warned against
falling play to just so stories. Fortunately, biologists are able to make
use of mechanisms in their explanation of variation, selection, and inheritance, which makes their job
easier, and philosophers of biology for example, are really interested
in these kind of questions. Questions concerning how do biologists
make reference to mechanisms in their explanation solve adaptation for example. So here I think is an important question, which will come up in this
course in different ways. Is whether the kind of mechanical
explanations used in the physical sciences can be repeated in the social sciences. So for example, are there social
mechanisms that would help explain economic, political,
and historic phenomena. Well if there are, then there appears
to be an interesting continuity between explanation in the natural and
the social sciences. And philosophers of science and
social science are really interested in these questions,
they're interested in continuities and discontinuities in methodology between
the natural and the social sciences. So one of the final things I wanted to
talk about was just this idea of big history as a grand narrative. Why do I think it's a grand narrative? Well, because it brings together strands
of historical explanation in different disciplines. In that sense it's interdisciplinary or
multidisciplinary, and it draws on work in quite diverse
disciplines for example cosmology, paleontology, anthropology, biology,
history, economics, and indeed philosophy. So in one sense it provides a unifying
narrative of these various strands, that helps us to make sense of how physical and
social complexity has emerged over time. [MUSIC]