Matt Ridley
The Red Queen. Sex and the evolution of human nature.


1.  Human nature                                                              1
2.  The enigma                                                               23
3.  The power of parasites                                                   53
4.  Genetic mutiny and gender                                                89
5.  The peacock tale                                                        129
6.  Polygamy and the nature of men                                          
7.  Monogamy and the nature of women                                        209
8.  Sexing the mind                                                         245
9.  The uses of beauty                                                      277
10. The intellectual chess game                                             307
    The self domesticated ape                                               345


Chapter 1
Human nature
------------
When a surgeon cuts into a body, he knows what he will find inside.
But the differences are tiny compared with the similarities.

It is the assumption of this book that there is also, in the same way, a typical
nature. 
The "smile" of a baboon is a threat; the smile of a man is a sign of pleasure.
But there are culture codes: a shake of the head that means yes.

Is that it is impossible to understand human nature without understanding how
it evolved, and it is impossible to understand how it evolved without understanding
how human sexuality evolved.

Why sex? Reproduction is the sole goal for which human beings are designed;
everything else is a means to that end: human beings inherit tendencies to survive,
to eat, to think, to speak, and so on. But above all they inherit a tendency to
reproduce. Therefore, anything that increased the chances of a person reproducing
successfully was passed on at the expense of anything else.
There is no other way for evolution to work except by competitive reproduction.
The ability to reproduce is what makes living things different from rocks.

! Everything can be inherited except sterility !
None of your direct ancestors died childless.

Reproduction is not synonymous with sex; there are many asexual ways to reproduce.

Of Nature and nurture
----------------------
The idea that we were designed by our past was the principal insight of Charles Darwin.
Every living species is designed quite unconsciously by the selective reproduction
of its own ancestors to suit a particular life style.
Human nature was as carefully designed by natural selection for the use of a social,
bipedal, originally African ape as human stomachs were designed for the use of
an omnivorous African ape with a taste for meat.

!!!
Human nature is a product of culture, but culture is also a product of human nature,
and both are the products of evolution.
!!!

Bodies are built from cake like recipes, not architectural blueprints, and it is
simply impossible to feed information back into the recipe by changing the cake.

Sex cells - eggs and sperm = remained segregated from the rest of the body from
the moment of their birth. Germ remains unchanged during the development of the
ovum into an organism. You are born free of sin.

Universal human nature, common to all peoples.
Shakespeare was writing about the same human nature that we know today.
Only his vocabulary (which is nurture, not nature) has aged.

The individual in society
-------------------------
Human beings are individuals. All individuals are slightly different.
Societies that treat their constituent members as identical pawns soon run into
trouble. Economists and sociologists who believe that individuals will usually act
in their collective rather than their particular interests (from each according to
his ability, to each according to his needs   vs  devil take the hindmost) are
soon confounded: society is composed of competing individuals as surely as markets
are composed of competing merchants; the focus of economic and social theory is,
and must be, the individual.

Just as genes are the only things that replicate, so individuals, not societies,
are the vehicles for genes.

Every idiot can be father or mother to a genius - and vice versa.
Every face and every set of fingerprints is effectively unique.

Sex mixes together the genes of two people and discards half of the mixture,
thereby ensuring that no child is exactly like either of its parents.
And it is also sex that causes all genes to be contributed eventually to the pool
of the whole species by such mixing.
Sex causes the differences between individuals but ensures that those difference
never diverge far from a golden mean for the whole species.

A simple calculation will clarify the point: every human being has two parents,
four grandparents, eight great-grandparents, sixteen gret-gret-grandparents, and so on.

A mere thirty generations back - in, roughly, A.D. 1066 - you had more than a billion
direct ancestors in the same generation = 2^30.

If you go back further still, the different human races soon merge. Little more than
three thousand generations back, all of our ancestors lived in Africa.
Yet the differences between any two individuals, of the same race or of different
races, can still be large. BUT only 7 % of the genetic differences between two
individuals can be attributed to the fact that they are of different race; 85 % of
genetic differences are attributable to mere individual variation, and the rest
is tribal or national.

Sex is merely the dealer, generating unique hands from the same monotonous deck
of genetic cards shared by the whole species.

Uniqueness of the individual is only the first of the implication s of sex for
human nature: male and female.

Different natures for the two genders, natures that suit the particular role of each gender.
Male usually compete for access to females, rather than vice versa.
Men are more aggressive than women.

A third implication of sex for human natures is that every other human being alive
today is potential source of genes for your children. And we are descended from only
those people who sought the best genes, a habit we inherited from them.
People are attracted to people of high reproductive and genetic potential:
    - the healthy;
    - the fit;
    - powerful.


p.16
Ours to reason why?
--------------------
Adaptation

There was no designer.

Animal (simple) is an automation, carrying out the simple instructions of her neural program.
If whitefly occupied, withhold sperm.

I believe that it is always worth asking the question  WHY?
Most of science is the dry business of discovering how the universe works, how
the sun shines, or how plants grow. Most scientists live their lives steep -ed
in HOW questions, not WHY questions.
Difference between the question:
    - Why do men fall in love?
    - How do men fall in love?
The answer to the second will surely turn out to be merely a matter of plumbing.
Men fall in love through the effects of hormones on brain cells and vice versa,
or some such physiological effect. One day some scientist will know exactly how
the brain of a young man becomes obsessed with the image of a particular young
woman, molecule by molecule. But the why question is to me more interesting
because the answer gets to the heart of how human nature came to be what it is.

In mobile animals hermaphrodites are less good at doing two things at once than
males and females are at each doing his or her own thing.


In physics, there is no great difference between a why question and a how question.
How does the earth go around the sun? - by gravitational attraction.
Why does the earth go around the sun? - because of gravity.

Every living creature is a product of its past.

Of conflict and cooperation
---------------------------

Computers have no effect on productivity because people learn to complicate and
repeat tasks that have been made easier.

Every creature on earth is in a Red Queen chess tournament with its:
    - parasites (or hosts);
    - predators (or prey);
    - mate.

Cooperation and conflict.


p.22
Chapter
The enigma

p.27
Pregnant virgins
----------------
For people, sex is only why to have babies, and that, plainly enough, is its purpose.
The problem was that there seemed to be all sorts of better ways of reproducing.
Microscopic animals split in two.

p.29

Of sex and free trade
---------------------
A brief genetic glossary is necessary before we proceed.
Genes are biochemical recipes written in a four letter alphabet called DNA,
recipes for how to make and run a body.
A normal human being has two copies of each of 30,000 genes in every cell in his or
her body. The total complement of 60,000 human genes is called the genome, and
the genes live on twenty three pairs of ribbon like objects called chromosomes

Meiosis - mixture male and female genes. Each of the 23 pairs of chromosomes
is laid alongside it opposite number. Chunks of one set a swapped with chunks
of the other in a procedure called recombination.
Sex is recombination plus outcrossing; this mixing of genes is its principal
feature. The consequence is that the baby gets a thorough mixture of its four
grandparents genes (because of recombination) and its two parents' genes (because
of recombination).
! Recombination and outcrossing are the essential procedures of sex. Everything
else about it - gender, mate choice, incest avoidance, polygamy, love, jealousy -
are ways of doing outcrossing and recombination more effectively or carefully.

So sex equals genetic mixing.

p.30
Sex is a sort of free trade in good genetic inventions and thus greatly increases
the chances that they will spread through a species and the species will evolve.
Sex speeds up evalution.
Sexual animals adapt and quick to change.
Evolution is something that happens to organisms. It is a directionless process
that sometimes makes an animal descendats more complicated, sometimes simpler,
and sometimes changes them not at all.

p.32
Mankind's geatest rival is mankind
----------------------------------
We use our intellects not to solve practical problems but to outwit each other.
Deceiving people, detecting deceit, understanding people motives, manipulating
people - these are what the intellect is used for.
So what matters is not how clever and crafty you are but how much more clever
and craftier your are than other people.

p.35
The rediscovery of the individual
---------------------------------

p.40
Provocation by ignorance
------------------------

The master copy theory
----------------------
Like Morse code with two kinds of dots and two kinds of dashes. Call these
bases letters: A, C, G, and T.

A pairs with T and vice versa, C with G and vice versa. This means there is
an automatic way of coping DNA.

p.45
Cameras and ratchets
--------------------
Mutation.
Mutation is rare events. 

p.54
Chapter 3
The power of parasites

p.
The art of being slightly different
-----------------------------------
If you want your son to become pope, the best way to achieve this is not to have
lots of identical sons but to have lots of different sons in the hope that one
is good, clever, and religious enough. It is a lottery. Therefore, sex is useful
to the individual rather than the species when the offspring are likely to face
changed or unusual conditions.
Sex gives variety, so sex makes a few of your offspring exceptional and a few
abysmal, whereas asex makes them all average.

p.58
The tangled bank
----------------
Charles Darwin  - Origin of Species

p.63
The red queen
-------------
Red Queen - this peculiar monarch became part of biological theory twenty years
ago and has been growing ever more important in the years since then.

Red Queen first prophet - Leigh Van Valen.
Probability a family of animals would become extinct does not depend on how long
that family has already existed. In other words, species do not get better at
surviving. Their chances of extinction are random.

The struggle for existence never gets easier. However well a species may adapt to
its environment, it can never relax, because its competitors and its enemies are
also adapting to their niches. Survival is a zero sum game. Success only makes one
species a more tempting target for a rival species.

Red Queen is a formidable woman who runs like the wind but never seems to get anywhere:
All running you can do to keep in the same place: If you want to get to somewhere else,
you must run at least twice as fast as that!
Red Queen has become a great personage in the biological court. And nowhere has
she won a greater reputation than in theories of sex.

Red Queen theories holds that the world is competitive to the death.

But did we not just hear that species are static for many generations and do not
change? - Yes. The point about the Red Queen is that she runs but stays in the
same place. The world keeps coming back to where it started; there is change
but not progress.

p.65
Sex, according to the Red Queen theory, has nothing to do with adapting to the
inanimate world - becoming bigger or better camouflaged or more tolerant of cold
or better at flying - but is all about combat -ing the enemy that fights back.

In virtually any account of evolution: drought, frost, wind, or starvation looms
large as the enemy of life. The great struggle, we are told, is to adapt to
these conditions.
The first ecological theories of sex were all directed at explaining this adaptability
to the physical environment.
Far more often other creatures are involved - parasites, predators, and competitors.
Predators and parasites probably cause most of the world deaths, directly or
indirectly.

The Great War of 1914-1918 killed 25 million people in four years.
The influenza epidemic that followed killed 25 million in four months.

There may be more bacterial than human cells in the object you proudly call
your body.

Parasites have a deadlier effect than predators for two reasons. One is that there
are more of them. The second reason, which is the cause of the first, is that
parasites are usually smaller than their hosts, while predators are usually larger.
This means that the parasites live shorter lives and pass through more generations
in a given time than their hosts. As a consequence, they can multiply faster than
their hosts and control or reduce the host population.

This is truly the world of the Red Queen, where you never win, you only gain
a temporary respite.


p.67
Battles of wit
--------------
A rabbit running from a fox is running for its life, so it has the greater evolutionary
incentive to be fast.

p.68
Artificial viruses
------------------
Startling proof of the fact that parasites and hosts are locked in evolutionary
arms races has come from a surprising source: the innards of computers:
IN the late 1980s evolutionary biologists began to notice a new discipline
growing among their more computer adept colleagues called artificial life:
Artificial life is a hubristic name for computer programs that are designed to
evolve through the same process of replication, competition, and selection as
real life. They are, in a sense, the ultimate proof that life is just a matter
of information and that complexity can result from directionless competition,
design from randomness.
When the history of computers comes to be written, it is possible that the first
program to earn the appellation " artificially alive " will be a deceptively
simle little two hundred line program written in 1983 by Fred Cohen.
The program was a virus that would insinuate copies of itself into other
programs in the same way a real virus insinuates copies of itself into other hosts.

p.71
Picking DNA locks
-----------------
The longer your generation time, the more genetic mixing you need to combat your
parasites.
Bind = viruses employ protein molecules that fit into other molecules on cell surface:
The arms between parasites and their hosts are all about these binding proteins.
Parasites invent new keys: hosts change the locks. - At any one time a sexual
species will have lots of different locks; members of an asexual one will all have
the same locks.
Individual by having sex, can produce offspring more likely to survive than an
individual that produces clones of itself. The advantage of sex can appear in a
single generation.

p.74
The similarity between sex and vaccination
------------------------------------------
The normal way to fight a disease is to produce antibodies, by vaccination or
whatever. The immune system is a fairly recent invention in geological terms.
It started in the reptiles  perhaps 300 million years ago.

! Frogs, fish, insects, lobsters, snails, and water fleas do not have immune systems.

The immune system would not work without sex.

The immune system consists of white blood cells that come is about 10 million
different types. Each type has a protein lock on it called an antibody which
corresponds to a key carried by a bacterium called antigen. If a key enters that
lock, the white cell starts multiplying ferociously in order to produce an army
of white cells to gobble up the key carrying invader, be it a flu virus, a
tuberculosis bacterium, or even the cells of a transplanted heart.

But the body has a problem. It cannot keep armies of each antibody lock ready
to immobilize all types of keys because there is simply no room for millions of
different types, each represented by millions of individual cells. So it keeps only
a few copies of each white cell. As soon as one type of white cell meets the
antigen that fits its locks, it begins multiplying.
Each lock is generated by a sort of random assembly device that tries to maintain
as broad a library of kinds of lock as it can, even if some of the keys that fit
them have not yet been found in parasites.
This randomness means that the host is bound to produce white cells that are designed
to attack its own cells among the many types it invents. To get around this, own
cells are equipped with a password, which is known as a major histocompatibility
antigen. This stop the attack. (keys, locks, passwords).
To win, then, the parasite must do one of the following:
    -   infect somebody else by the time the immune response hits (as flu does);
    -   conceal itself inside host cells (as the AIDS virus does);
    -   change its own keys frequently (as malaria does);

Bilharzia parasites grab password molecules from host cells and stick them all
over their bodies to camouflage themselves from passing white cells.

p.76
William Hamilton and parasite power
-----------------------------------
In a game between sex and asex, asex always won, other things being equal.
Next, they introduced several species of parasites. Now the asexual race no longer
had an automatic advantage. Sex often won the game.

p.79
Sex at altitude
---------------

p.81
Sexless snails
--------------

p.83
The search for instability
--------------------------

p.85
The riddle of the rotifer
-------------------------

Sex is about disease. It is used to combat the threat from parasites.

p.88
Chapter 4

Genetic mutiny and gender
-------------------------

p.92
Why are people not hermaphrodites?
Why there are two separate genders?

The thirty thousand pairs of genes that make and run the average human body find
themselves in much the same position as seventy five thousand human beings inhabiting
a small town.
Without cooperation, the town would not be a community.
Every would lie and cheat and steal his way to wealth at the expense of everybody else,
and all social activities - commerce, government, education, sport.

Genes 


