Nightmare alley

Card 1
The Fool

Stan Carlisle stood well back from the entrance of the canvas enclosure, under
the blaze of a naked light bulb, and watched the geek.
This geek was a thin man who wore a suit of long underwear dyed chocolate brown.
The wig was black and looked like a mop, and the brown greasepaint on the
emaciated face was streaked and smeared with the heat and rubbed off around the mouth.
At present the geek was leaning against the wall of the pen, while around him
a few - pathetically few - snakes lay in loose coils, feeling the hot summer night
and sullenly uneasy in the glare. One slim little king snake was trying to climb
up the wall of the enclosure and was falling back.

Stan liked snakes, the disgust he feld was for them, at their having to be penned up
with such a specimen of man. Outside the talker was working up to his climax.
Stan turned his neat blond head toward the entrance.

"... where did he come from? God only knows. He was found on an uninhabited island
five hundred miles off the coast of Florida. My friends, in this enclosure you will
see one of the unexplained mysteries of the universe. Is he man or is he beast?
You will see him living in his natural habitat among the most venomous reptiles
that the world provides. Why, he fondles those serpents as a mother would fondle
her babes. He neither eats nor drinks but lives entirely on the atmosphere.
And we're going to feed him one more time! There will be a slight additional charge
for this attraction but it's no a dollar, it's not a quarter - it's a cold, thin
dime, ten pennies, two nickels, the tenth part of a dollar. Hurry, hurry, hurry!

Stan shifted over to the rear of the canvas pen.
The geek scrabbled under a burlap bag and found something. There was the wheet of
a cork being drawn and a couple of rattling swallows and a gasp.

The marks surged in - young fellows in straw hats with their coats over their arms,
here and there a fat woman with beady eyes. Why does that kind always have beady eyes,
Stan wondered. The gaunt woman with the anemic little girl who had been promised
she would see everything in the show. The drunk. It was like kaleidoscope -
the design always changing, the particles always the same.
Clem Hoately, owner of the Ten in One show and its lecturer, made his way through
the crowd. He fished a flask of water from his pocket, took a swig to rinse his
throat, and spat it on the ground. Then he mounted the step. His voice was
suddenly low and conversational, and it seemed to sober the audience.

"Folks, I must ask you to remember that this exhibit is being presented solely
in the interests of science and education. This creature which you see before you..."

A woman looked down and for the first time spied the little king snake, still
frantically trying to climb out the pit. She drew in her breath shrilly between
her teeth.

"... this creature has been examined by the foremost scientists of Europe and
America and pronounced a man. That is to say: he has two arms, two legs, a head
and a body, like a man. But under that head of hair there is the brain of a beast.
See how he feels more at home with the reptiles of the jungle than with humankind."

The geek had picked up a black snake, holding it close behind the head so it
couldn't snap at him, and was rocking it in his arms like a baby, muttering sounds.

The talker waited while the crowd rubbered.
"You may well ask how he associates with poisonous sepents without harm. Why, my
friends, their poison has no effect whatsoever upon him. But if he were to sink
his teeth in my hand nothing on God's green earch could save me."

The geek gave a growl, blinking stupidly up into the light from the bare bulb.
Stan noticed that at one corner of his mouth there was a glint from a gold tooth.

"But now, ladies and gentlemen, when I told you that this creature was more beast
than man I asw not asking you to take my word for it. Syan - " He turned to the
young man, whose brilliant blue eyes had not a trace of revelation in them/
Stan, we're going to feed him one more time for this audience alone. Hand me the basket."

Stanton Carlisle reached down, gripped a small covered market basket by the handle,
and boosted it over heads of the crowd. They fell back, jamming and pushing.
Clem Hoately, the talker, laughed with a touch of weariness.
"It's all right, folks; nothing you haven't seen before. No, I reckon you all know
what this is." From the basket he drew a half grown leghorn pullet, complaining.
Then he held it up so they could see it. With one hand he motioned for silence.
The necks craned down.
The geek had leaned forward on all fours, his mouth hanging open vacantly.
Suddenly the talker therew the pullet into the pit with whirl of feathers.

The geek moved toward it, shaking his black cotton mop of wig. He grabbed for the
chicken, but it spread its stumpy wings in a frenzy of self preservation and dodged.
He crawled after it.
For the first time the paint smeared face of the geek showed some life.
His bloodshot eyes were nearly closed. Stan saw his lips shape words without sound.
The words were, You son of a bitch.

Gently the youth eased himself out the crowd, which was straining, looking down.
He walked stiffly around to the entrance, his hands in his pockets.
From the pit came a panicky clucking and cakling and the crowd drew its breath.
The drunk beat his grimy straw hat on the rail. "Get ...

Then a woman screamed and began to leap up and down jerkily; the crowd moaned
in an old language, pressing their bodies tighter against the board walls of the pit
and stretching. The cackling had been cut off short, and there was a click of teeth
and a grunt of someone working hard.

Stan shoved his hands deeper in his pockets. He moved through the flap entrance back
into the main ring to the ten in one show, crossed it to the gate and stood looking out
on the crnival midway. When his hands came from his pockets one of them held a shiny
half dollar. He reached for it with his other hand and it vanished. The with a secret,
inner smile of ontempt and tirumph, he felt along the edge of his white flannel
trousers and produced the coin.

Against the summer night the ferris wheel lights winked with gaiety of rhinestones,
the callipe's blast sounded as if the very steam pipes were tired.

Chist a mighty, it's hot, hug, kid?

Clem Hoately, the talker, stood beside Stan, wiping the sweat froim the band of
his panama with a handkerchief. Say, Stan, run over and ge me a bootle of lemon
soda from the juice joint. Here is a dime, get youserl one too.

Whe Stan came back with the cold bottles, Hoately tilted his gratefullly.
"Jesus, my throat sore as a bull ass in fly time."

Stan dranks the pop slowly. Mr.Hoately
Yeah, what?

How do you ever get a guy to geek? Or is this the only one? I mean, is a guy born
that way - liking to bite the heads off chickens?

Clem slowly closed one eye. Lem me tell you something, kid. In the carny you don't
ask nothing. And you'll get told no lies.

Okay. But did you just happen to find this fellow - doing - doing this somewhere
behind a barn, and work up the ack?

Clem pushed back his hat. "I like you, kid. I like you a lot. And just for that
I'm going to give a treat. I'm not going to give you a boot in the ass, get it?
That's the treat.

Stan grin ned, his cool, bright blue eyes never leaving the older man's face.
Suddenly Hoately dropped his voice.

Just because I'm your pal I ain't going to crap you up. You want to know where
geeks came from. Well, listen - you don't find 'em.

He let this sink in, but Stanton Carlisle never moved a muscle. "Okay. But how?"

Hoately grabbed the youth by the shirt front and drew him nearer.
"Listen, kid. Do I have to draw you a damn blueprint? You pick up a guy and
he ain't a geek - he's a drunk. A bottle a day booze fool. So you tell him like
this: I got a little job for you. It's a temporary job. We got to get o new geek.
So until we do you'll put on the geek outfit and fake it.' You tell him,
'You don't have to do nothing. You'll have a razor blade in your hand and when
you pick up the chicken you give it a nick with with the blade and then make like
you're drinking the blood. Same with rats. The marks don't know no different."

Hoately ran his eye up down the midway, sizing up crowd. He turned back to Stan.
"Well, he does this for a week and you see to it that he gets his bottle regular
and a place to sleep if off in. He likes this fine. This is what he thinks is
heaven. So after a week you say to him like this, you say, "Well, I got to get
a real geek. You're through.' He scare s up this because nothing scares a real
rummy like the chance of a dry spell and getting the horrors. He says, 
What's the matter? Ain't I doing okay? So you say, Like crap you're doing okay.
You can't draw no crowd faking a geek. Turn in your outfit. You're through.
Then you walk away. He comes following you, begging for another chance and you say.
Okay. But after tonight out you go. But you five him his bottle.

That night you drag out the lecture and lay it on thick. All the while you're
talking he's thinking about sobering up and getting the crawling shakes.
You give him time to think it over, while you're talking. Then throw in the chicken.
He'll geek."

The crowd was coming out of the geek show, gray and listless and silent except for
the drunk. Stan watched them with a strange, sweet, faraways smile on his face.
It was the smile of a prisoner who has found a file in a pie.


CARD II
The magician

If you'll step right over this way, folks, I want to call your attention to the
attraction now appearing on the first platform. Ladies and gentlemen, you are
about to witness one of the most spectacular performances of physical strenth
the world has ever seen. Now some of you young fellows in the crowd look pretty
husky but I want to tell you, gents, the man you are about to see makes the
ordinary blacksmith or athlete look like a babe in arms. The power of an African
gorilla in the body of a Greek god. Ladies and gents, Herculo, the world's most
perfect man."




