

4.7   Data Link Layer switching                               358
4.7.1 Uses of bridges
4.7.2 Learning bridges
4.7.3 Spanning Tree Bridges
4.7.4 Repeaters, Hubs, Switches, Routers, and Gateways        366
4.7.5 Virtual LANs                                            369


p.358
4.7 Data Link Layer switching

Convenient to join the LANs together to make a larger LAN.
With devices called bridges.
The Ethernet switches are a modern name for bridges.
We shall use the terms bridge and switch interchangeably.

Bridge operate in the data link layer, so they examine the data link layer
addresses to forward frames. They forward, can handle IP packets as well as
other kinds of packets. In contrast, routers examine the address in packets and
route based on them, so they only work with the protocols that they were designed
to handle.

4.7.1 Uses of bridges
---------------------
Ideally bridges should be completely transparent. 
Surprisingly enough, it is actually possible to create bridges that are
transparent. Two algorithms are used:
    - backward learning algorithm to stop traffic being sent where it is not needed
    - and a spanning tree algorithm to break loops that may be formed when switches
      are cabled together willy - nilly.
 
4.7.2 Learning Bridges
----------------------
All the of the stations attached to the same port on a bridge belong to the same
collision domain, and this is different than the collision domain for other ports.
If there is more than one station, as in classic Ethernet, a hub, or a half-duplex
link, the CSMA/CD protocol is used to send frames.

Each bridge operates in promiscuous mode, that is, it accepts every frame transmitted
by the stations attached to each of its ports. The bridge must decide whether to
forward or discard each frame, and, if the former, on which port to output the frame.
This decision is made by using the destination address.
To have a big (hash) table inside the bridge - the table. Before they use a flooding
algorithm: every incoming frame for an unknown destination is output on all the ports
to which the bridge is connected except the one it arrived on. As time goes on, the
bridges learn where destinations are. Once a destination is known, frames destined
for it are put only on the proper port; they are not flooded.
The algorithm used by the bridge is backward learning. Bridges see every frame sent on
any of their ports. By looking at the source addresses, they can tell which machines
are accessible on which ports. Arrival time of the frame is noted in the entry.
Periodically, a process in the bridge scans the hash table and purges all entries
more than a few minutes old.

Hubs wire all ports together so that a frame input on one port is simply output on all
other ports.
Because bridges only look at the MAC addresses to decide how to forward frames, it is
possible to start forwarding as soon as the destination header field has come in.

4.7.3 Spanning Tree Bridges
To increase reliability, redundant links can be used between bridges.
If one link is cut, the network will not be partitioned into two sets of computers.
This redundancy introduces some additional problems because it creates loops in
topology. Each bridge follows the normal rule for handling unknown destinations,
which is to flood the frame. This cycle goes on forever.
The solution to this difficulty is for the bridges to communicate with each other
and overlay the actual topology with a spanning tree that reaches every bridge.

To build the spanning tree, the bridges run a distributed algorithm.
Each bridge periodically broadcasts a configuration message out all of its ports
to its neighbors and processes the messages it receives from other bridges, as
described next. These messages are not forwarded, since their purpose is to build
the tree, which can be used for forwarding.
The bridges must first choose one bridge to be the root of the spanning tree.
Each bridge remembers the shortest path it finds to the root. The bridges then
turn off ports that are not part of the shortest path.
Turning off the ports prunes some links from the network to prevent loops.

I think that I shall never see
A graph more lovely than a tree.
A tree whose crucial property
Is loop free connectivity.
A tree which must be sure to span
So packets can reach every LAN
Fist the Root must be selected
By ID it is elected
Least cost paths from Root are traced
In the tree these paths are placed
A mesh is made by folks like me
Then bridges find a spanning tree.

Spanning Tree - IEEE 802.1D
2001 to more rapidly find a new spanning tree after a topology change.

p.366
4.7.4 Repeaters, Hubs, Switches, Routers, and Gateways
Variety of ways to get frames and packets from one computer to another.
Those devices operate in different layers.

Physical layer: Repeater, hub
Data link     : bridge, switch
Network  layer: router
Transport     : gateway
Application   : gateway

A hub has a number of input lines that it joins electrically.
Frames arriving on any of the lines are sent out on all the others.
If two frames arrive at the same time, they will collide, just as on a coaxial cable.
All the lines coming into a hub must operate at the same speed.
Hubs differ from repeaters in that they do not (usually) amplify the incoming
signals and are designed for multiple input lines.


A bridge connects two or more LANs. Like a hub, a modern bridge has multiple ports,
usually enough for 4 to 48 input lines of a certain type. Each port is isolated to be
its own collision domain; if the port a full-duplex point-to-point, the CSMA/CS
algorithm is no needed. The bridge only outputs the frame on the port where it is
needed and can forward multiple frames at the same time. If frames come in faster
than they can be retransmitted, the bridge may run out of buffer space and have
to start discarding frames.

Switches are modern bridges by another name. The differences are more to do
with marketing than technical issues, but there are a few points worth knowing.
Bridge were developed when classic Ethernet was in use, so they tend to join
relatively few LANs and thus have relatively few ports. The term "switch" is more
popular nowadays. Modern installations all use point-to-point links, such as
twisted pair cables, so individual computers plug directly into a switch and thus
the switch will tend to have many ports. Finally, switch is also used as a general
term. With a bridge, the functionality is clear.

Routers strip off the packet located in the frame's payload field. This software
uses the packet header to choose an output line.

Transport gateways connect two computers that use different connection oriented
transport protocol. Can copy the packets from one connection to the other, reformatting
them as need be.

Application gateways understand the format and contents of the data and can
translate messages from one format to another.

p.369
4.7.5 Virtual LANs.
With the advent of twisted pair and hubs in the 1990s, all changed.
Buildings were rewired (at considerable expense) to rip out all the yellow garden
hoses and install twisted pairs from every office to central wiring closets at
the end of each corridor or in a central machine room.
Today, the cables have changed and hubs have become switches, but the wiring pattern
is still the same. This pattern makes it possible to configure LANs logically
rather than physically. If a company wants k LANs, it could buy k switches.
Security, load, broadcast traffic.
Network vendors began working on a way to rewrite buildings entirely in software.
VLAN (Virtual LAN) - IEEE 802
VLANs are based on VLAN-aware switches.
Often the VLANs are informally named by colors, since it is then possible to print
color diagrams showing the physical layout of the machines.
To make the VLANs function correctly, configuration tables have to be set up in
the bridges. These tables tell which VLANs are accessible via which ports.
IEEE 802.1Q Standard, after much discussion, it did the unthinkable and changed
the Ethernet header, added VLAN tag.
A few questions that come to mind are:
    1. need we throw out several hundred million existing Ethernet cards?
    2. If not, who generates the new fields?
    3. What happens to frames that are already the maximum size?

VLAN fields are only actually used by the bridges and switches and not by the user
machines. To use VLANs, the bridges have to be VLAN aware.
Because there can be computers (and switches) that are not VLAN aware, the
first VLAN-aware brige to touch a frame adds VLAN fields and the last one down
the road removes them. Tagged 802.1Q.

As to the problem of frames longer than 1518 bytes, 802.1Q just raised the limit
to 1522 bytes. Luckily, only VLAN-aware computers and switches must support
these longer frames.

  DST MAC | SRC MAC | 0x8100 (>1500 len, it is type) | Pri/CFI Vlan Id | Len

As we mentioned above, when a tagged frame arrives at a VLAN aware switch, the
switch uses the VLAN identifier as an index into a table to find out which ports
to send it on. But where does the table come from? If it is manually constructed,
we are back to square zero: manual configuration of bridges.
The beauty of the transparent bridge is that it is plug and play and does not
require any manual configuration. It would be a terrible shame to lose that
property. Fortunately, VLAN aware bridges can also autoconfigure themselves based
on observing the tags that come by. If a frame tagged as VLAN 4 comes in on port 3,
apparently some machine on port 3 is on VLAN 4. The 802.1Q standard explains
how to build the tables dynamically, mostly by referencing appropriate portions
of the 802.1D standard.

VLANs introduce something that is surprisingly similar to a connection.


p.383
5. The network layer

The network layer is concerned with getting from the source all the way to the destination.
Getting to the destination may require making many hops at intermediate routers
along the way. This function clearly contrasts with that of the data link layer,
which has the more modest goal of just moving frames from one end of a virtual wire to the other.
Thus, the network layer is the lowest layer that deals with end to end transmission.
To achieve its goals, the network layer must learn about the topology of the network
and compute appropriate paths through it, even for large networks.
Finally, when the source and destination are in different independently.


p.384
5.1 Network layer design issues
-------------------------------
5.1.1 Store and Forward Packet Switching
----------------------------------------
The major components of the network are the ISP's equipment.
A host with a packet to send transmits it to the nearest router, either on its
own LAN or over a point-to-point link to the ISP. The packet is stored there
until it has fully arrived and the link has finished its processing by verifying
the checksum. Then it is forwarded to the next router along the path until it
reaches the destination host, where it is delivered.

p.385
5.1.2 Services Provided to the Transport Layer
----------------------------------------------

