So, we have seen few examples some one or
two more we will see small example ah. For

example or this thing example 1.9 right, that
how much energy does a 200 watt electric ah

lamp consume in 2 hours right. So, expression
for energy is given as your you know that

it is the p into t right.
So, basically it is watt hour. So, this is

power and this is your time . So, 200 watt
and it is for 2 hour. So, 200 into 2 so, 400

watt hour right , but we know that joule per
second is equal to watt because you have seen

p is equal to d w by dt w is the work done
so, in joule. So, it is joule per second right

therefore, one hour is equal to your 60 into
60, 3600 second.

So, this is 200 into 2. So, 400 into 1 hour
this is hour right. So, 1 hour is equal to

60 into 6 ah. So, this much of joule that
is 720,000 joule and is equal to your 720

kilo joule, because joule per second is equal
to watt as well as you make this watt hour

into watt second we are making this one watt
second because one hour is equal to your 60

into 60, so, 3600 second multiplied by this
200 into 400. So, this much of watt second

and joule per second is equal to watt. So,
joule is equal to watt second. So, this much;

that means, this unit actually watt second
is equal to this joule is equal to 720 kilo

joule. So, small example.
Now, another example tell this is here look

whenever we are taking time function here
it is a we are anyway we are interested for

initially for the dc circuit, but when we
will go for single phase ac and 3 phase ac

circuits at the time detail we learn, but
little bit idea little bit of you know ah

flavor you will get here that that much . So,
for example, example 10 it is given derive

an expression for the power for the voltage
source shown in figure 1.12 this is your figure

1.12 also compute the energy for the interval,
t is equal to 0 to t is equal to infinity

right .
So, this is that this is the figure circuit

element right, now this is the voltage source,
now current i is equal to is given 2 into

e to the power minus t ampere, this is the
current i is equal to 2 it is the time function

i is equal to say 2 into e to the power minus
t ampere and this voltage v it is equal to

12 volt.
So, question is that that first thing is that

this is a voltage source and current entering
into the positive terminal right current entering

into the positive terminal, but in this case
just power expression will calculate that

p is equal to you know that v into i therefore,
current enter the positive polarity hence

we can compute power as p is equal to vi.
So, it is v is equal to 12 volt it is 12 volt

right and i is equal to 2 into e to the power
minus t ampere therefore, it is 12 into 2

e to the power minus t 24 e to the power minus
t watt these a time function, later we will

see in ac circuit time function we will see,
but just to give you a flavor .

So, expression for energy transferred is given
by it is given in between time t is equal

to 0 to t is equal to infinity. So, here that;
that means, your what you call energy transfer

limit 0 to infinity p into dt right. So, you
know p is power and t in terms of time second.

So, what second it comes it will be joule
then right.

So, it is 0 to infinity 24 e to the power
minus t dt. So, you integrate this much of

joule you integrate this. So, it will be minus
24 e to the power minus t 0 to infinity put

this values you will get it is 24 joule right.
So, expression for energy transferred it is

actually 24 joule, I think this is simple
thing it is understandable to all of you right

slowly and slowly you have to understand now
each and everything.

So, active and passive circuit elements . So,
an electric circuit is simply an interconnection

of the elements earlier we have discussed
above this right. So, circuit analysis is

the process of determining the currents through
the elements or the voltage across the elements

of the circuit, either you have to find out
the current through an element or the voltage

across this elements right. So, that is our
circuit analysis.

So, basically there are 2 types of elements
found in electric circuit one is active element,

another is passive elements, actually active
elements are those which are not passive or

in the other way passive elements are those
we cannot active something like this right,

by considering the energy delivered to or
by them right.

So, a circuit element your is said to be passive
if the total energy delivered to it your from

the rest of the circuit is always nonnegative;
that means, it is I mean it is it can be 0

or positive right . So, a circuit element
is said to be passive, if the total energy

delivered to it from the rest of the circuit
is nonnegative; that means, that the rest;

that means, that suppose energy is equal to
given for any initial time t 0 to t p into

dt is energy because p is power and time watt
second actually is equal to joule.

So, this t is equal to t 0 t. So, p is equal
to vi say t, but mathematically you can represent

like this. So, t 0 to t limit it is vi dt
it will be greater that equal to 0 then you

can say it is a passive elements.
Of course, an active element is one that is

not passive just opposite right. So, if this
is equation 1.10 first that was a equation

10 right it does not hold for all time in
general an active element is capable of generating

energy while passive element is not active
element it will generate energy, but passive

element it cannot generate. For example that
passive elements are resistors ah in general

resistors, inductors and capacitors these
are actually passive elements right and example

of active elements are it is generators, batteries
and operational amplifiers.

So, these are certain things you should keep
it in your mind. So, passive elements are

resistors inductors or capacitors and active
elements example are generators, batteries

and your operational amplifiers. So, in this
section we will be familiar with some of the

your what you call that important active element.
So, the most important active elements are

voltage or current sources right. So, that
generally deliver power to the circuit connected

to them, either voltage source or current
source just I would like to tell one thing

in that introduction video I mention that
thing that only handle independent sources,

but let me tell you later I thought that your
dependent sources also will be covering very

simple thing then everything will be concrete
right.

So, dependent source also will be there, but
very simple later you will know very simple.

So, both your independent and dependent both
sources will be considered right. So, there

are 2 types of sources independent and dependent
sources. So, will consider a both all the

in the introduction be device said only independent
later I realize no both will consider right.

So, an independent voltage source is a basically
a two - terminal element for example, your

this is a voltage source say two terminal
element right and symbol I will come to that

later right ah. And that maintains a specified
voltage between these 2 terminal between this

terminal it is ah your this voltage is specified
right between this 2 terminal right. The voltage

is completely independent of this voltage
is completely independent of the current right

or or it is independent of the voltage of
some other parts of the circuit right . So,

physical sources such as generators and batteries
may be regarded as appropriations to ideal

voltage sources. So, either generator and
batteries you can ah you can be regarded as

your ideal voltage sources that way we will
think.

Now, one is look at the symbol here, one circle
is there and it is plus minus this can be

represented by dc as well as ac both you can
dc one of the symbol right, I am not ah there

not ac I said say time varying I will say
time varying right. So, either plus minus

it can be regarded as your dc source or time
varying and this one value you make that one

your what you call plus minus if you make
the larger ah your larger one larger continuous

line is plus and smaller one is minus. So,
this is actually v or dc source right.

But this one ah it can be used for constant
or time varying voltage this can be this symbol

meaning for both. So, if you use this symbol
also absolutely correct or if it is a pure

dc then this one this one also can be used
for a pure dc . So, these 2 are symbol for

your ah independent voltage sources right.
So, similarly so, can be. So, that is why

the whatever I said that can be used to represent
dc voltage source, but the symbol of this

thing can also. So, be used for a time varying
voltage source, but dc as well as time varying

both can be made .
So, an independent current source, when it

is independent current source again it is
a two - terminal elements, it is a two - terminal

element that provides a specified current
right your what you call completely independent

of the voltage ah across the source. So, this
for this current source whatever it is there

is completely independent of the voltage across
the source right. So, this is totally these

a symbol of the current source and these current
source if this symbol is ah true for both

ah dc as well ac right this symbol is two
or both will ac we will see later.

So, independent sources are usually meant
to deliver power to the your external circuit.

So, this symbol this figure one is a true
for both dc and ac I have told you right . So,

example i is equal to 2 ampere, if it is i
is equal to 2 ampere say if i is equal to

2 ampere here right then it is a pure dc source
and if i is equal to say 2 sin 100 pi pi t

then it is an ac current source, but this
symbol this symbol is same for both dc as

well as ac, when we will go much deeper we
will know all this things in detail right.

So, not making much exerciser wherever necessary
I will do it. So, these thing is understandable

right. So, now dependent sources are usually
this dependent sources are usually a diamond

shape. So, for example, this is plus minus
this is dependent current source right an

arrow is shown upward here right just for
the purpose of example and this is your dependent

voltage source; that means, dependent voltage
source means this voltage whatever it is it

may be function of current in the some part
of the your some branch of the circuit or

may be a function of some voltage across some
elements of the circuit.

Similarly, this current is may be the function
of some other ah branch current in the circuit

or may be function of some voltage across
the ah your circuit. So, these are dependent.

So, these are not ideal these are not constant
these are dependent sources . So, symbol is

this is diamond shape and this symbol is your
like this that is the dependent sources these

dependent voltage source and this is dependent
current source.

So many things are written here, but whatever
I am telling meaning is same right. So, and

a dependent or controlled voltage source is
similar to an independent source except that

the voltage across the source terminals is
a function of other your what you call other

voltages or current in the circuit for example,
look. This is this is actually your dependent

voltage source v 0 is given 2 into v x is
general you can take a into v x right a maybe

1 2 3 4 what is ever and below less than 1
also .

So, it is some 2 into v x is taken for, this
is v x actually is the voltage in the circuit

across some other branch right, but just symbolically
it is shown that v 0 is equal 2 v x, a v x

changes then v 0 will change right. So, this
is actually called voltage controlled voltage

source, because this v 0 is function of this
voltage across some other element in the circuit

say x. So, that is why it is written say v
x . So, this is actually they voltage controlled

voltage source, because v 0 is a function
of v x and this v x is the voltage of the

circuit act was some other element x right
this why you imagine at the stage.

Similarly, this is also this voltage v 0 it
is taken 3 into i x, sometimes we call this

is a gain parameter 3, it is 3 it may be 4
5 2 1.2 it does not matter, just for the purpose

of explanation we have taken v 0 is equal
to 3 into i x. If the i x is the current through

some other branch some branch x a and i x
is changing to a v 0 is changing; that means,

it is a it is actually called current controlled
voltage source because these voltage source

v 0 is function of the current, that is why
it is called current controlled voltage source

CCVS ah in short it is voltage controlled
voltage source VCVS right .

So, this is actually dependent source that
ah your v is equal to your ah v 0 is equal

to 2 v x or v 0 is equal to 3 i x these are
called dependent source that is v 0 in case

it may be function of voltage ah or may be
function of current also right. So, this is

when it is function of voltage it is called
voltage controlled voltage source when these

function of current it is called current controlled
voltage source because it is because v 0 is

a function of the current, I hope this is
simple thing I hope it is understandable to

you.
Similarly, that means, whatever I said that

everything, everything is written here this
is figure 1.6 say 1.0 ab. So, whatever ,whatever

I said everything, everything is everything
is written here. So, I am not reading or not

telling further everything is written here
right and only thing is that here in this

case ah whenever it is ah your dependent on
the current so, this parameter this 3 you

will call the gain parameter right.
So, now the now next is the next is this is

your what you call voltage source, now current
flowing through a dependent current source

is determined by a current or voltage elsewhere
in the circuit for example. This is for example,

say current controlled current source. So,
this is a dependent ah current source this

is i 0 is equal to say 2 into i x say 2 is
it is 2 i have taken it may be 3 4 less than

1 whatever it is it does not matter right,
but further purpose of explanation say it

is 2 into i x .
So, this is actually current controlled current

source because this i 0 the current is function
of the current i x, i x may be the current

of some element your in the your branch size
current i x flowing some branch x a. So, this

these actually that i 0 is equal to 2 into
i x so; that means, it is current controlled

current source whenever this is function of
this one it is function of current i x. So,

it is current controlled current source CCCS
we call right.

Similarly, this current when i 0 is 3 v x
it is voltage controlled current source because

this i 0 is function of the voltage v x ah.
So, it it and this v x is maybe it is the

voltage across ah your across the branch say
x right. So, i 0 equal 3 your what you call

this 3 i have taken 3 it may be 1 2 3 4 it
does not matter this is also called gain parameter.

So, i 0 is equal to 3 v x and this is your
what you call voltage controlled current source.

And another thing is that whenever we are
showing this is plus minus it is shown right

similarly for the current source whenever
this arrow is upward this ah I mean it is;

that means, that means current is leaving
this terminal. So, this arrow this is your

what you call that arrow upward means the
current is leaving upward I mean current is

moving flowing upward. So, current is flowing
like this flowing like this right.

So, this I mean if it is like this just hold
on right. So, this is the that your what you

call current is flowing like this, similarly
this is your what you call that your upward

this thing direction. So, current is flowing
like this right. So, this is actually your

ah upward direction is shown, if it is downward
direction then naturally it will be reversal

direction will be in other way so, this is
the meaning that your upward.

So, this is your what you call ah current
source right just hold on. So, this is actually

this currents source we are now ah now we
are ah you have seen that your what you call

a dependent voltage source and ah your dependent
current source, both are dependent on either

voltage or current right now. So, whatever
I said that is your ah in the our this circuit

everything, everything is explained here,
everything is explained here.

So, it is simple thing. So, not I mean ah
this thing going do not to repeat this again

right so. That means the controlled - voltage
sources and controlled - current sources right

are useful in constructing the circuit models
for many types of real world devices such

as your ah such as your ah transistor, just
hold down such as your transistor, then your

transformer, then electrical machines and
electronic amplifiers right . So, these are

the your what you call that this kind of ah
this thing your real time ah real world application

just hold on.
So, this thing so, there are 4 such sources

you have shown. So, voltage controlled voltage
source we call VCVS, current controlled voltage

source already we have shown CCVS, then current
controlled current source CCCS and voltage

controlled current sources VCCS right these
are the 4 thing, next you take another example.

So, ah determine this circuit is shown this
is say example 11. So, determine the power

absorbed or supplied by each element in figure
this, now you know little bit of you have

to understand little bit for example, if you
see that the current I is equal to 6 ampere

this is 6 ampere. Now voltage is given v is
equal to 20 volt plus minus p 1 p 2 here,

this is another element p 2, this is p 3 and
this is p 4, this is another dependent current

source. So, these are the you have to find
out power absorbed or power supplied right,

power supplied must be is equal to power absorbed.
If you see something is not matching then

somewhere something has gone wrong in calculation
.

Now this is actually some element so, plus
minus polarity has been mark, here also voltage

source polarity plus minus has been mark,
here also polarity plus minus has been mark

right and this is your current is shown upward
and this current source is showing one upon

6 I; that means, if I is equal to 6 ampere
here I is equal to look 6 ampere if we put

I is equal to 6 here it will be actually 1
ampere.

Now, ah previous when our previous discussion
we are seen that, when that your current leaving

the this is a voltage source current leaving
the your ah your positive polarity or positive

terminal; that means, power is supplied and
sign will be negative right. So, in this case

if you see that this I 1 current is coming
out from this source. So, it is actually leaving

that your what you call that leaving this
plus terminal; that means, power supplied

convulsively negative therefore, p 1 will
be your minus 20 into 6. So, minus 120 watt

it will be power supplied.
So; that means, if you look at here that p

1 is equal to 20 into minus 6 that is minus
120 watt this is the supplied power. So, whenever

current is leaving plus terminal it should
be minus I told you earlier; that means, power

supplied right and this current I is equal
to 6 ampere according to this polarity, entering

into this circuit into this element right
therefore, it this circuit will absorbed power

because current entering at the positive terminal;
that means, power absorbed should be 12 into

6 p 2 is equal to 12 volt into I is equal
to 6 ampere. So, it will be your 12 into 6

so, your thing it will be 72 watt.
So, here it will see that that in the that

your p 2 is equal to 72 that is power absorbed
power that is p 2 is equal to 72 watt, again

you come to this circuit that again 7 ampere
current is entering into this terminal. So,

it is a positive; that means, as current entering
into the positive terminal it will be power

absorbed and voltage is given 8. So, 8 into
7 so, p 3 will be 56 watt power absorbed.

So, it is made here that p 3 is equal to 8
into 7, 56 watt right. So, it is absorbed

power.
Now, come here this is the current source,

now question is that this is this is the current
source now here just making it here only right

making it here. So, I is equal to 6 ampere;
that means, this one is equal to your 1 by

6 into 6 write in here that is your 1 ampere
this is 1 ampere. Now question is whether

it your what you call it delivered or absorbed
power, now look this terminal is plus this

is minus; that means, this is the simply wire
only this is the simply wire only right .

So; that means, I can mark it here this is
plus and this is minus because this is plus

minus nothing is there. So, this is plus minus
and this current is upward means current is

ah your what you call this one ampere current
is moving like this, flowing like this; that

means, current actually leaving this terminal
the plus plus terminal as well as a leaving

means it is power supplied right whenever
current leaving the plus terminal this power

it is power supplied .
So; that means, this sign will be negative,

but is current here is one ampere current
here is your what you call 1 ampere now what

is the voltage. Now if you come to this your
if you come here look that voltage across

this your it is 8 into minus 1 6 I told you
because current is leaving the plus terminal.

So, it is your minus 1 I is equal to 6 ampere.
So, it is coming minus 8 watt supplied power;

that means, here you come just hold on .
So, whenever I was explaining this ah this

one your this is your what you call that this
voltage actually suppose this is plus minus

I mean this point is a this is b then nothing
is the also this point is a this is also b.

So, this voltage actually if we make like
this the v a b is equal to say 8 volt right.

So, same voltage here also 8 volt, but current
I is equal to your 6 ampere here I is equal

to 6 ampere is given look at that point when
I am making 6 ampere. So, basically this one

will be 1 upon 6 into 6 that is your 1 ampere
right and I told you the direction is a upward.

So, current is flowing through this and this
is plus minus means this is plus, this is

minus right therefore, that current is leaving
the plus terminal because this is plus, this

is minus it leaving the plus terminal. So,
if it is so; that means, it is power. So,

your what you call, power supplied by this
source it will be actually your this thing

will be minus your 8 into 1 so, that is your
minus 8 watt right so, this is the concept

ok.
Thank you very much we will be back again

.

