ok, so, basic concept to we have seen particularly
the current voltage and that your power and

that power supplied and power absorbed, right.
So, we will now come to the basic laws. So,

generally your in the in the electrical ah
circuit analysis , right.

The concept such as current voltage and power
in an electrical circuit have been we have

studied in the chapter 1 ah. In a given circuit
may be or to determine these variables requires

that we must understand some fundamental laws
that given your that govern electric circuit.

So, these laws are known as ohms' law and
Kirchhoff's current law and Kirchhoff's voltage

law; that is, KCL and KVL and before that
ohm's law . So, these laws actually form the

foundation upon which the electric circuit
ah analysis is built.

So, in this topic actually in addition to
an addition to the laws, we will also involve

right some commonly applied technique electric
circuit analysis . This technique actually

include the current division voltage division
combining resistors in series or parallel

and star to delta and delta to star transformation,
right.

So, in this particularly in that basic law
we will see that application of this laws,

and the technique will be your what you call
restricted to only resistors circuit and several

examples are presented. So, in this case we
will form we will represent several examples

by as the DC circuits. So, will only consider
the resistive part right, but let us try to

understand this.
So, first is let us see the ohm's law in general

actually materials have a characteristic behavior
of your resisting the flow of electric charge.

If you resisting the flow of electric charge
means it is basically resisting the flow of

current, right .
So, the physical property or ability to resist

current is known as resistance. So, that for
any material, right it has some physical property

or ability to resist current is known as resistance
and is represented by the symbol R, capital

R these the symbol R; in other words, resistance
is the capacity of materials to impede the

flow of current or more specifically the flow
of electric charge. So, circuit element used

to model this behavior is is the resistor.
So, this is actually ah actually that what

you call regarding the resistance .
Now, conceptually we can understand the resistance

actually of a material if we think about moving
electrons that make up electric current interacting

with and being resisted by the atomic structure
of the material through which they are moving

. So, because of the your course of these
interaction some amount of electric energy

is converted to thermal energy and dissipated
in the form of heat. This effect actually

is not desirable, but look, but many useful
electrical appliances take advantage of resistance

heating including space heaters, irons stoves
and toasters right.

So, this we take that your what you call that
um that that your what you call the effect

of resistance, right. So, if we see that figure
this figure 2.1.

So, figure 1 a it is shows a material with
uniform cross section ah area ah sectional

area of a length is l and resistivity is ohm
ah rho that is ohm meters, right. So, this

is your ah ah I need not mark it by red ink
it is understandable, this is a your what

you call uniform ah cross section is like
a cylindrical shape that all wire it looks

like a cylindrical shape . And this length
l and cross sectional area of it is A, right.

So, it is circular and material with resistivity
rho, and this is the symbol of the resistance

and these the current entering, it is the
plus minus right.

So, resistance your resistance is a later
we will see that resistor ah earlier we have

seen, but again we will see that a resistor
is a passive element. So, it absorbed power

. So, that is why this this is the current
these a 2 terminal, and these the resistor

R and current is entering into the positive
terminal across the resistor voltage is v.

So, resistor actually absorbed power that
is why this way you represent right.

So, because it is a passive element it will
absorbed power. So, that is why it is that

is why it is your what you call , your plus
plus it is taken and minus it is taken convince

noise. But if we reverse the direction also
method solving circuit one can do it, but

ultimately we will find resistor actually
your what you call um that absorbing power

because current , that is why this conversely
is taken this symbol is for resistor, right

.
So, we know that from your ah your physics

electricity ah subject, we know that R is
equal to rho into l by a, right. So, the amount

of resistance that will depend on the material.
So, what type of material your using that

it depend like gold ah, silver, aluminum,
copper and other thing right . So, good conduct

good conductors such as copper and aluminum
have low resistivity. If you have low resistivity,

then you have your what you call they have
the low your resistance, right and hence have

small values of resistance.
So, they are good choices for wiring right

ah your used to conduct electric current.
In a circuit diagram copper or aluminum wiring

is is ah copper or aluminum wiring is not
usually modeled as a resistor. If you take

a wire you cannot modeled is as a resistor,
because wire has a very negligible resistance

you can ignore it right , but resistor actually
made of your what you call the carbon and

some compound alloy, right?
So, in circuit connection copper or aluminum

is not usually modeled as a resistor, you
will take resistance of the wire in the if

you take ah resistance of wire is 0 , right.
So, the resistance of the wire is so small

compared to the resistance of the other elements
in the circuit that we can neglect ah the

wiring resistance. So, it is also small it
is almost 0 will neglect it, right? And for

such that our circuit diagram will be simplified.
For the purpose of constructing circuit resistors

are compound resistors are usually made from
metallic alloys and the carbon compounds,

right .
So, in the first year when we will first year

when we will do first year lab, there you
will see barrier type of rheostat, right . So,

the circuit symbol for the resistor is given
this is this is the this is the circuit symbol

for the resistor resistor is given here and
I told you something about these also why

you will make it like this, right . So, and
there are some materials of I have I have

wrote it for you the resistivity ah for commonly
use material like gold.

It is resistivity it is ohm ohm meter. So,
gold is 2.45 into 10 to the power minus 8,

it is a good conductor, but you cannot use
it is very expensive .

Silver also 1.64 into 10 to the power minus
8, it is a good conductor, but silver also

expensive you cannot make it , but copper
and aluminum 1.72 into 10 to the power minus

8 is a good conductor . Aluminum also 2.8
into 10 to the power minus 8, that it also

good conductor. Other thing are semiconductor
ah if just for computational purpose that

conductor semiconductor and your insulator
material just I given a table .

Now, silicon is 6.4 into 10 to the power 2
it is semiconductor carbon also 4.4 into 10

to the power minus 5, it is your semiconductor.
And germanium 47 into 10 to the power minus

2 it is a semiconductor. And mica it is 5
into 10 to the power 11. So, insulator these

all ohm meter all ohm meter ohm meter unit
is given here, ohm meter and paper one into

10 to the power 10 this is insulator. So,
may conductor semiconductor and insulator

and there resistivity something I have taken
I have kept it here right .

So now ohm that is gs ohm actually ah is a
lifespan was 1787 to 1854. So, here German

physicist actually who established the relationship
between the current and voltage for a resistor,

right. So, this if this relationship is known
as your ohm's law. So, ohms law is the algebraic

relationship between voltage and current for
a resistor. So, actually ohms' law states,

the voltage v across a resistor is directly
proportional to the current i flowing through

the resistor.
I mean if you have a resistor and current

is flowing through this resistor say this
current is i and across the resistor is voltage

is v. So, v is proportional to i, now v is
equal to Ri that constant of proportional

take to R that is called resistance. So, that
is your v proportional to i, that is this

is equation ah 2, 2.2 for chapter 2 or v is
equal to iR, right.

So, equation 3 that is 2.3 is a mathematical
forms of form of ohms' law.

Ohm define the constant of proportionality
for a resistor to be resistance R. The resistance

can change if the external or internal conditions
of the elements are your altered.

So, that ah it can be change if you internal
or external ah things are that element altered;

for example, if if it a temperature increases
so, resistance change right if. So, if there

if there are changes in the temperature so,
R will change. So, R in equation 2.3 is measured

in the unit of ohm designated as ohm, right
. So, equation 2.3; that means, these equation

these equation 2.3 right.
We can write that your R is equal to v upon

i right; that means, v is volt i is ampere
and R it is ohm. So, one ohm is equal to 1

volt per ampere. So, this is a understandable
a simple thing this is a understandable to

you, right .
Now, the polarity of voltage v and the direction

of the current i must conform with the passive
sign convention as shown in figure 2.1 b.

2.1 b means this figure I showed you earlier
this figure, this figure 2.1 v. I told you

that R is a R is a passive element resistor
is a passive element and current entering

into the positive we have taken plus minus
and assuming current entering a positive terminal.

So, it absorbed power and across this voltage
is v, v is equal to iR. So, that this is that

convention this is the convention this is
figure 2.1 b I told you earlier also , right.

So, in therefore, your this if current flows
from a higher potential to lower potential,

right v is equal to iR it is true and if current
flows from a lower potential to higher potential,

then v is equal to minus R. The meaning is
something like this, ah let me go to this

a figure 2.1 b, right. So, it is showing current
your plus i this way; that is, higher potential

to here it is mentioned that higher potential
to lower potential, right.

So, if the current flows from a higher potential
to lower potential v is equal to iR, but if

it is current flows from a lower potential
to higher potential, v will be is equal to

minus iR; that means, you're that means, ah
let me let me just for your understanding.

So, I mean this is this is one, but if it
happen so, if it happen so say this is I making

plus this is minus, this is my resistance
R, and if the deduction of the current is

like this, this is i these voltage is v, then
v will be is equal to minus iR.

Because current is flowing from lower potential
to higher potential, right. So, it will be

v is equal to minus iR, but when we will solve
the numericals and other thing we will find

that actually later we will see that your
what you call that resistor resistor is passive

element final it will absorbed power if v
is equal to minus R it happens you will find

that I will be negative. So, ultimately v
will be is equal to iR because direction will

change right .
So, in this case so, that means, it if direction

of the current change it will be v is equal
to minus iR. Later when see when we will go

for KVL equation we will see that, right.
So, let me let me clean this one . So, so

this is this is clear to you, that which is
higher to lower and lower to higher ah potential,

right. So, that is v is equal to minus R,
since the value of R can vary from 0 to infinity,

R may be 0 to infinity. So, we can so, we
must consider the 2 extreme possible values

of R that is when R is equal to infinity and
when R is equal to 0.

So, for example, look at this circuit before
explanation suppose suppose this is a this

is an this is a your what you call some electric
circuit represented by your just a simple

box, right. And this is open, so that means,
R is equal to infinity; that means, current

is 0. So, when R is equal to infinity or R
tends to infinity i is equal to v by R so,

if R tends to infinity I will be 0. So, it
is called when R tends to infinity means is

says it is an open circuit, right?
And when R is equal to 0 just just connect

it like this without no other electric elements
simply wire. So, approximately we are not

considering the resistance of the wire it
is neglected. So, when R is equal to 0 so,

your i is equal to v by R, right. So, R is
equal to 0 means it is a short circuit it

a huge huge current will flow. And in that
case v is equal to 0 .

So, for open circuit v is there, but i is
0, right ? When R tends to infinity, but when

it is short circuit when you short it ah suppose
these 2 terminals are shorted. So, I will

be there because it is a close path, i will
be there current will be high, but R is equal

to 0. But v at same time v is equal to 0,
because b is equal to iR if R is equal to

0, then v is equal to 0. So, that is why v
is equal to 0 short circuit, this is an open

circuit.
So, that means, when I R tends to infinity

limit b by R will be 0, right. So, it is an
open circuit when i is equal to 0, similarly

when b is equal to iR, when it is a short
circuit, right. So, R tends to 0 so, v is

equal to 0, but i is not 0 for short circuit
ah it will be fault actually, it will carry

huge amount of current and if short circuit
happens your are electrical devices or elements

will be damaged also, right. So, this is the
this is the your 2 cases for short circuit

and a open circuit and short circuit, open
circuit means resistance is infinity, short

circuit means resistance is 0, right.
Now, now 3 you have to understand each and

everything as symbol also . So, a resistor
is either a it may be either a fixed resistor

or a variable type, right. So, there are 3
different symbols are shown, this is actually

this is fixed type this is 2 terminals are
there. So, this is a fixed resistance R. Say

right this is a fixed resistance.
Now in this case this is a variable resistance

whenever cutting an arrow through it, right.
So, this is actually variable resistance.

When we will do first year laboratory, you
will see the fixed or variable resistance

in the same one terminal will be ah 1 3 point
if we fixed it on the both the end of the

resistance a resistor will find is a fixed
value, but one point is a fixed point another

is a variable point, when we will do first
year laboratory if the barrier type of rheostat

you will see this.
And third one this one and wiper is there

this is a this is also variable, but this
is symbol of this potentiometer. Perhaps in

physics lab in your ah in in your you might
have seen it, right this is a potentiometer.

So, this is third one is symbol for potentiometer
or pot for short, right. So, this is a potentiometer

and this is a variable resistor, whenever
making the arrow means this indicates a variable,

but this is a fixed one. So, these are symbols
so, everything is written here.

So, not telling it again right, now, it is
what mentioning here that the all the resistors

all all the all that here that not all the
resistors actually obey ohms' law, right?

Because resistors may be non-linear in that
case, it does not obey the ah your ohm's law.

So, a is a resistor that always that obey
is ohms' law is known as a linear resistor.

So, I have underlined these one so, a resistor
that obeys ohms' law is known as a linear

register.
So, a linear resistor has a constant resistance,

and it is current voltage characteristic is
linear right as shown in passing through the

origin.
If you see this these a linear register characteristic

it is slope is R, it is passing through the
origin since a this following this follows

ohms' law, right? Because it is a linear characteristic.
But if you see, but this characteristic v

by i, it is not from not a straight line it
is some kind something like a curve linear,

right . So, so, resistance they does not obey
ohms law is known as non-linear resistor . So,

resistance of a non-linear resistor actually
varies with current and typical current voltage

characteristic is this is the typical current
voltage characteristic.

For example, your light bulb and diode are
the examples of devices with non-linear resistance.

So, ah I mean any any any devices obeys , I
mean a it obeys your ohm's law , that is a

resistor that that is a call a linear resistor.
If it is not that is non-linear resistor simple

thing, right. So, this is the iv characteristic
of a linear resistor the first one iv characteristic

of a non-linear resistor, right?
Now, in a circuit in in a circuit analysis

we always represent one thing reciprocal of
resistance R; that means, is known as conductance

, that we reciprocal of resistance we defined
as a conductance, right. For example, if G

is equal to 1 upon R, right. R is you know
that b is equal to b is equal to iR right

b is equal to iR then 1 upon R is equal to
i by v. So, that is why G is equal to i by

v, right?
So, the conductance G actually is a measure

of how well an element will conduct current,
this is actually the idea . So, conductance

G is a measure of how well an element will
conduct your current.

So, the unit of conductance is mho or siemens.
So, either actually ohm is the unit of ah

resistor resistance. So, it is reciprocal
of that that is why it is mean mho or symbol

is also just opposite right or siemens ah.
In short it is s that is the your unit of

the conductance .
So, one siemens is equal to 1 mho is equal

to 1 ampere per volt , these a conductance
i is the ampere v is the volt so, ampere per

volt. So, one siemens is equal to 1 mho is
equal to 1 ampere per volt this starting I

have started this thing from the very you
know beginning such that ah such that ah nothing

will be left out hopefully, right ?
So, thus conductance is the ability of an

element to conduct electric current. So, this
is that that is why I have underlined here,

the conductance is the ability of an element
your what you call to conduct electric current.

Now, equation 7, right from equation 2.7,
if these equation i is equal to Gv from this

equation, right ? So, from this equation actually
i is equal to conductance into voltage Gv,

now the power dissipated by a resistor can
be expressed as p is equal to you know vi,

right, I am not writing by pen here it is
a understandable p is equal to vi and v is

equal to iR. So, here I put v is equal to
iR; that means, it is i square R, right is

equal to v square upon R.
Because i is equal to v by R ah this one if

I write for you, ah just hold on ah. So, ah
. So, this is actually i square R so, i is

equal to also we can write now. i is equal
to v by R; that means, v square by R square

into R, that is is equal to this one v square
by R, right?

So, i is equal to your ah your what you call
v square , i square R is equal to v square

by R. So, let me let me ah remove this one
clean this one, right?

So, this is that means, p; that means, R is
always positive, and it is v square. So, power

loss across resistor is always positive it
absorbed power, right ? Very simple thing,

but we have to try to understand this, right.
So, p is equal to vi a resistor is a passive

element it absorbed power, and R is always
positive for any circuit you take R is positive,

and it is v square whatever may be the v plus
or minus is square means always positive.

So, p is equal to v square by R always it
is positive where i square R always positive;

that means, it absorbed power .
Similarly, also just other you can write p

is equal to vi, now it is v, but in terms
of conductance i is equal to G into v; that

is v square G, right ? Or you can you can
ah you can make if it is i square, G because

v is equal to your what you call ah your i
is equal to Gv, right, i is equal to Gv. So,

v is equal i is equal to Gv. So, v is equal
to i by G, if you substitute here v is equal

to your i by G I making it for you just one
line .

So, if it is v is equal to your ah, your what
you call just 1-minute ah , sorry this is

i is equal to your ah G into your v, therefore,
v is equal to your i by G. So, if you substitute

here v is equal to i by G. So, it is i square
by G square into G that is your i square by

G . So, this is what your got, right? So,
this is i square by G so now, let me clean

it , right?
So, the here also it is v square i square,

here I mean G is taken positive it is reciprocal
of resistance. So, conductance is always positive

it is v square or i square; whatever may be
the positive or negative value, vi does not

matter if this p is always positive, right?
That means, it is that means, it show that

your what power dissipated in a resistor your
what you call it is actually it is a absorbed

power, right? Resistor observed power so,
power resistor is a non-linear function of

the either current or voltage this is it is
a parabolic type p is equal to i square R

is equal to v square by R or p is equal to
v square G or i square by G it is a parabolic

type of functions, right.
So, it is graph will be either this side you

plot i or v, this is power it is a parabolic
function just just I have ah drawn right.

So, since resistance R and conductance G are
just what I will told, that it is positive

right quantities the power dissipated in a
resistor is always positive. I told you thus

a resistor always your absorbed power from
the circuit it absorbed, right this confirms

the idea that a resistor is passive element.
And it is incapable of generating energy,

this is very important for you. When we will
listen this video, right just see that what

what we are discussing, right.
Now, up to this your ohm's law and this thing

let us come now to a small example , right?
An electric heater draws 4 ampere and at 240

volt.
So, find it is resistance so, we know R is

equal to v is equal to iR. So, R is equal
to v by i v is equal to 240 and i is equal

to 4 so, 60 ohm the resistance, right .
Another small example in each circuit in figure

2.6, right. So, this is 3 circuits are there
the value of either v or i is not known. Ri

we have to find determine the a the values
of v and i b the power dissipated in each

resistor. So, you have to find out v or i
v or i right whatever it is known are unknown,

unknown quantities you have to find out.
Now, look at this circuit is a current source

one ampere, right? And this is your this is
this current is entering the positive terminal.

So, v is equal to iR so, i is one ampere and
R is equal to 8 ohm. So, it will be v is equal

to 8 volt. And it is your current is flow
entering into the positive terminal, right

that is flowing from higher potential to lower
potential. So, it will be positive so, v is

equal to iR . So, it is one into 8 so, v is
equal to 1 into 8 8 volt.

Now, second case is, it is I hope I am not
marking it by pen ah I think it is simple

think. So, it is understandable to you, right?
This one ampere means this current is flow

this one ampere flowing through this circuit,
I mean , ok just just just let me make it

one thing for you these i is equal to 1 ampere.
So, the current is flowing like this current

is flowing this one ampere current is flowing
like this, this is actually ah showing it

this i. So, this i is equal to one ampere,
this is what is shown here, right?

So, let me let me let me clean it . Similarly,
ah just hold on , similarly ah this this this

is mho this is actually this value is G is
given, this is 0.1 mho G is given conductance

is given, right.
So, this is actually ah G is equal to 0.1

mho conductance is given of the circuit, right.
So, so, in this case a voltage is given your

100, 100-volt ah ah that is 100 volt. So,
you have to find out that what is what is

the current. So, just just let me let me clean
this one, right?

So, in this case ah just hold on ah, in this
case your i is equal to actually you know

this think i is equal to Gv, right i is equal
to G into v.

So, it is G is 0.1 and it is 100 so, i is
equal to 10 ampere, right. So, it is i is

equal to Gv, now another thing is that there
actually ah your what you call this is 50

volt, and this is 25-ohm ah resistor, but
look at that this current actually flowing

this means current entering into the plus
terminal. Later you will find this things

will be easier when we will come to the KVL
equation, but write from the beginning current

is entering into the ; that means, current
is flowing from your higher potential this

thing higher potential to ah lower potential,
right.

So, in this case, if you come to this that
; that means, the direction of the your voltage

rise. So, 25 resistor and the direction of
the voltage rise across the resistor. So,

i is equal to minus 50 by 25 is equal to minus
2 ampere, right. So, because this is in the

direction of the your what you call in the
voltage rise. So, that is why the negative

sign has come. So, that is why it is your
i is equal to minus 50 by 25 that is minus

2 ah your ah your ampere, right .
So, this is actually voltage source, right

this is one resistor this voltage source.
So, it is from the voltage your from the higher

ah your what you call in the direction of
the voltage rise, because it will encounter

plus first one is the KVL thing at the time
things will be easier . So, this is your what

you call minus 2 ampere .
Now, now last b part is your part b, ah this

thing ah the power dissipated in each resistor
here. We have seen the current is one ampere

and it is your what you call R is equal to
8 ohm.

So, in the first case, the that is v square
by R, that is power ah a absorbed by the resistor

8 ohm. So, bracket I am writing a power this
8 ohm means power absorbed in the 8-ohm resistor

v square by R. So, v square actually v is
8, we have computed divided by R ah is 8 ohm.

So, it is is equal to the same thing i square
R. So, i is one one square R into 8 actually

it is 8 watt. It is also 64 by 8, 8 watt i
square also ah one square R 8 . So, it is

8 watt so, it is understandable.
Similarly, that second circuit that there

G is your 0.1 ohm, this G is actually ah sorry
0.1 mho, and voltage is 100 volt. So, in this

case you can see that power ah your basically
it is a resistor say. So, it is your what

will be the power absorbed. So, i square by
G so, i is 10 ampere ah. So, 10 square by

G is 0.1. So, it is equal to same thing v
square G is equal to v is 100 volt, and G

is ah 100 square into G is 0.1 ultimately
it will become 1,000 watt, right.

Similarly, your ah 25 ohm that is this circuit,
this circuit 25 ohm resistor, right? Whatever

may be the current it does not matter, right.
So, it is v square by R is equal to 50 square

by 25, and is equal to also i square R i is
equal to minus 2 square into 25. So, ultimately

100 what I told you that for whatever may
be the direction of the current or or the

polarity of the voltage plus minus that power
ah your absorbed by the resistor , resistor

absorbed power it sign will be always positive,
right?

So, in this so, all this cases, you can see
it is 8 watt thousand watt or 100 watt all

the cases resistor actually absorbing power,
right this is, this is another small thing

that figure 2.7 shows simple circuit than
the current i the conductance G and the power

p. So, it is 30-volt source, and here one
resistor is there and it is 5-ohm resistance

and current flowing through this ah your is
i, right.

So, in this case voltage across in this case
there is no other element here, right no other

element. So, this is 30 volt; that means,
just ah just for your understanding only this

this voltage is 30 volt. So, this is plus
minus means this is plus minus. So, this voltage

is whatever whatever plus minus means this
is also plus minus , this 30-volt means is

to same voltage will be impress across this
your resistor; that means, my v will be is

equal to your 30 volt, right so, same voltage.
So, understandable it is very simple thing

this is plus minus is plus minus. So, there
is no other element here. So, plus minus and

so, whatever voltage is here same voltage
is here because no other element. So, there

is no voltage drop later, we will see this.
So, v will be is equal to 30 volt. So, let

me clean this one, right ? So, then what then
what will be the current then?

So, current will be i is equal to v by R is
equal to 30 by 5 is equal to 6 ampere .

So, conductance is G is equal to 1 upon R.
So, 1 by 5 so, 0.2 mho, because reciprocal

about. So, power is equal to v into i is equal
to 30 into 6. So, 180 watt this we can calculate,

or p is equal to i square R that is 6 square
i is the i is 6 ampere, we have calculated

this 6 ampere 6 square into 5. So, 180 watt
or p is equal to your v square G, that is

your ah your 30 v is 30 volt. So, 30 square
into 0.2 that is also 180 watt the way one

you can compute the your power, but is a resistor.
So, it will be power absorbed. So, all this

cases sign is positive.
Thank you very much, we will be back again.

