Programming in C++
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 11
Reference and Pointer (Contd.)
Welcome to module 7 in Programming in C++. We have discussed the basic concept of
reference and using that we have introduced the notion of call by reference. And, we
have shown that how certain functions like swapping can be written in a better way in
C++ by using the call by reference mechanism. We have also discussed that a reference
parameter can be a general input/output parameter for a function. Therefore, if I do not
want the function to change the formal parameter and make consequent changes to the
actual parameter, then we also have the option of defining a reference parameter to be a
const parameter by which it can only be initialized by the actual parameter. But, any
changes made to that will not be allowed by the compiler. We will now next continue and
talk about the other side of the function mechanisms.
(Refer slide Time: 01:29)
In C, we use the mechanism to get a value back from a function; is called return by value
mechanism. That is, as parameters are copied from actual to formal, the return value is
also copied from the return value expression, which we write in the return statement back
to wherever we are assigning that function value. So, in contrast in C++ it is possible to return a value by reference. Let us see what we are saying.
So, first let us focus on the two sides. On left, we have return by value; on right, we have
return by reference. So, on left we have a function which is a typical C return form in C+
+. It is only using a call by reference. And on right, please note that after the return type
we have the reference symbol. So, if it says that we are returning the reference of the
return expression. And then, the use is similar. Here, we invoke this function; here we
again invoke this function. And to keep the result of the function, and this is primarily for
the purpose of illustrating the effect to you.
I have used another reference variable b. So, b will keep the reference to the value that is
returned. If you look into the return by value part that is on this side, you will need to
understand that this reference b must be a constant. Why should this be a constant?
because if you recall the pitfalls of reference definition, we had shown that if I have an
expression j+k, I cannot create a reference to that because j+k is computed in a
temporary.
Now, here what do I have on the right-hand side? I have a function invocation. What is a
function invocation? It is an expression. So, I cannot write a difference to that. I can have
to write a constant reference to it, which is the temporary location which will be
preserved through this reference. On this, writing the constant is just for the sake of
uniformity. It is not actually required. You will understand that once you understand
mechanism.
Let us look at the output now. So, the first output that will come the cout which is here,
which prints a, and its address. Next is within the function. The function has been called.
After this print, the function has been called here. So, next is this cout, which is this
output where you print x. It is a call by reference. So as expected a, and x have the same
address.
Finally, you look at this third output which will come from main, after the function has
returned. And, what does a function do? Function simply returns a value that you had
passed it. So, it is expected to return the same value. So, b returns the same value. But, if
you print address of b here, it is different from the address of a, or address of x. And, this
is expected; because it is returning by value. So, what it is returning is a copy of x; which
is in a temporary, and I have held that temporary is a part of b; as a reference in b.(Refer slide Time: 05:52)
Think about the similar on the reference side. Here, we are looking at call by, return by
reference. The first output comes from here which is, a and its address. Second is from
the function which is x and its address. Call by reference; they have to be identical. they
are indeed identical. The third output comes from here after the function has returned.
You see that it is not only b is same, this address of b is also same; because what has
actually been returned, what has been returned is not the value of x.
But, what has been returned is a reference that is the address of x itself; the reference of
x, which is an alias of x. So, b now becomes an alias of what was x. And, what was x? x
was an alias of a. So, b has in this process become an alias of a. So, that is the difference
between return by value and return by reference. Again, if you do return by reference,
then it will show some interesting and tricky issues. But if you do return by reference,
then again, we can avoid copying of large structures if that is what we want to return. So,
in many places you may want to return by reference.(Refer slide Time: 07:22)
Now as I said, return by reference can get tricky at times. Look at here. There is a
function which takes a parameter by reference and returns that same parameter by
reference. And, look at this line and first we will have to believe your eyes that what you
are seeing is correct program. You have never seen a function invocation occurring on
the left-hand side of an assignment. Function invocation is always on the right-hand side.
So, here this is valid; because what is the function returning? The function is actually
returning an alias. It is actually returning an address; it is actually returning a variable.
So, if I say that I am making an assignment 3 to it, then I am actually making a
assignment to that alias.
So, let us see what it means. Let us look at the output. We have the outputs here. So, this
is the cout, the function was called at this point with a, x is 10, which is, a is 10. So, it
returned the same x. So, b has become 10. So, when I look at this output, it is a is 10, b is
10. No surprise. I call it once more here. And, assign 3 to the return reference. So, what
will it mean? if I am calling it with a, then a and x become alias. x is an alias of a. I am
returning by reference. So, what I returned is an alias of x, which has to be an alias of a.
So, what I have got here as return is actually an alias of a. So, you can always make an
assignment 3 to it. Where will that assignment happen? It is an alias of a. So, assignment
will happen in a. So, check a out of this. a has become 3. So, this is what gets possible if
you do a return by reference.Now, we will subsequently as we go forward, to get to later features, we will show how
this kind of a tricky thing and little bit confusing thing can be used for advantage in some
places in the program. I am not advising that you write this kind of code very frequently.
But, there are places where this can be used to advantage in a good way.
(Refer slide Time: 10:44)
And, using this on the right column which you had not seen so far, I show that if you are
not skilled, you might shoot at your foot in trying to do this. Look at this code, which is
very similar to what the earlier code was. The only difference being that it now takes the
parameter x, which is naturally an alias of a, because it is call by reference and it has a
local variable t and it initializes t with x and then increments t.
And then, look at here, earlier it was returning x. Now, it returns t which is this local
variable as a reference. And, you did a same thing here. The first two lines are at similar.
They produce a same output. So, there is nothing to look at. Look at this line. You have
done this here. So, if you do this and try to expect that, some change will happen to a, or
something like that. You will be surprised that nothing will happen; because what you
have done? You have actually returned a local variable. So, what gets returned here is a
reference to the local variable t. And that is very risky; because once you have returned
the reference, the function call is over. So, the local variable has disappeared, but your
reference is still alive. So, your reference says that I have the variable. The function call
has terminated. So, it actually does not exist. This variable t no more exists, that is dead.But, you hold a reference to that. So, the results of this kind of program could be very
unpredictable.
So, the bottom line prescription is if you are using return by reference, never return a
local variable. If you are returning by reference, always return a variable which is
available, which should logically be live after the function call has ended. So, those
variables could be global, those variables as we will see could be static members, those
could be the actual parameters that you got as alias in the formal parameter, those could
be dynamically allocated values and so on. But, not the automatic local variables that a
function has, because that can get you into real difficulty and these are bugs which are
very difficult to detect; because you will not see anything in the code. On the code, it
looks everything clean and simple. But, still your results will become unpredictable.
(Refer slide Time: 13:32)
Finally, as we have seen through this module, reference is talking about an alias of a
variable it is a mechanism which allows you to change the value of a variable without
actually taking the name of the variable. So, in that way it has got lot of similarity and
differences with the pointers.
So, I will just summarize this difference in these two columns. So, between the pointers
and references, both refer to addresses. Pointers refer to address; reference also refers to
an address. So, they are similar to that extent, but they differ in multiple ways. For
example, look at the next point. Pointers can point to NULL; I can assign a pointer to null. What it means? Semantically, it means that I am not pointing anywhere. It has no
pointed data that I carry. But, reference cannot be NULL; because it is an alias. It is just
an alias. So, it has to have a variable to effect. So, that is a basic difference.
Since pointer points to different other data, unless a pointer is constant, I can actually
change the data that it is pointing to. So, the example clearly shows that you can do that.
If p was initially pointing to a, then it at some point statements, it can point to b. But, a
reference; for a reference, what you are referring to is fixed by the definition; because it
is an alternate name for a variable. So, certainly I cannot change that reference and make
the name different.
For example, if we just look into, into this line, if you are trying to do like this, then you
will not be able to achieve that if you write it as &b assigned c, thinking that you will
change the reference of b, from a to c. You will not able to do that because a moment you
write &b. Since, it is an alias for a, &b will be understood as &a, because this is an alias.
So, whatever you write to as b, what should apply to a, because this is an alias of a. And
then, &a is an address of a; & is the address operator.
So, what you saying that; you trying to assign c to the address of a, which is the
meaningless thing. So, you can try in all possibilities. For example, if you try to say
okay, am, I would like to change the reference by putting c to b, but then b is a. So, if
you try to assign c to b, you are basically assigning c to a. There is no way the language
does not give you any mechanism, any operator to do anything with the reference. You
can only refer. And, whatever you do actually is interpreted in terms of the data that is
referred, the referent. So, that is a basic difference.
For pointers, since it is possible that I am not pointing anywhere. Before using a pointer,
we need to check for null. Reference does not need that because it is, if it exists, then it is
alias of something or it does not exist. So, it makes the code much easier to write. You do
not have to bother about that and certainly it makes it faster in that sense because those
checks are not required.
Finally, if you look into exactly if both pointers and references are addresses, and exactly
what is the difference? The difference is not in the empowerment, not in terms of what
you get for reference. The difference is in terms of what you do not get for reference. If
you have a pointer variable, then you are given with a number of operators that you can operate with that variable. You can actually use that address as a value and do different
things. You can add an integer to it and advance a pointer. You can take two pointer
values and make a difference and see how many elements exist between these two
pointers in an array.
So, all these operators are given to you, by which you can change the pointer in whatever
way you want; which makes pointer so powerful. In reference, also the address is stored.
But, there is no way that you can catch hold of that address. You cannot hold that
address. There is no operation that is given on the reference. Any operation that you try
to do, actually boils down to operating on the referred object or the referent. So, that is
the basic difference.
And, in the way C++ is designed, both pointers and references have their own respective
place. It is not possible to do away with pointers and reference really add a value, but
there are languages where you do not have both these mechanisms. So, it is good to
understand. Particularly, if some you know java you would know that Java has a
reference, does not have a pointer. And, I am just raising this point because I want you to
note that the reference in java is not like the reference in C++. So, if you thought that let
me have more clarification in the concept of reference and read the favorite java book,
then you will only get more utterly confused. So, there is no real parallel of the reference
of java in C++, but it is mostly similar to constant pointer. What you have in java is a
reference is actually a pointer, but it is a constant pointer that you cannot change it. But,
it is neither fully a pointer nor fully a reference in C++. And, there are languages; like c
does not have reference.
There are languages which do not have pointers and so on. In C++ we have both. So, we
have a big responsibility to decide in a given context, whether we need to use the pointer
or we need to use a reference. And as we go along, different features and different
programming examples will keep on highlighting that the choice has to be judicious and
right for you to become an efficient C++ programmer.
So, in this module 7, we have introduced the concept of reference in C++ and we have
studied the difference between call by value and call by reference. We have also
introduced the concept of return by reference and studied the difference between the two
mechanisms. We have shown some interesting pitfalls, tricks, tricky situations that may arise out of this and we have discussed about the differences between references and
pointers.
