Programming in C++
Prof. Partha Pratim Das
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture - 22
Access Specifiers (Contd.)
Welcome to part 2 of module 12 of Programming in C++. We have discussed in this
module the different access specifier, so the visibility options of member of a class. We
have learnt that there are public and private access specifiers which can be used to
control who can access which part of the class. Public specifiers means that anyone, that
is any global function or any other class can access the member which is specified as
public, but if some member data member or method is specified as private then that data
member or method can be accessed only from within the definition of the class or more
precisely from other methods of the same class, but it cannot be access by anyone else.
Based on this we have outline the principle of information hiding where we have
prescribed that we should always have the attributes or data members as private and the
methods as public giving us the basic hiding of the state from the behavior of the object.
And we have seen example of that using a stack showing that if you expose the
implementation if you put the data members in public then what kind of difficulties and
risk that one would run, instead if the data members are private and only the methods of
the stack type or stack class, push, pop, top and empty are public then an application
would be able to seamlessly use a stack without being concerned about how the stack is
actually implemented without running any risk of tampering the stack in the process of
writing the application. Finally, we have shown how typically a code object-oriented C+
+ code should be organized for hiding information in terms of the header and
implementation files.(Refer Slide Time: 02:41)
We will next talk about an Idiom, which is a commonly known as the Get-Set Idiom
which is used for fine grained access control in different members of a class or an object.
We know that we will put all attributes in private and we will put methods in public and
this restricts access to data completely which is, what one extreme that you can have.
Now typically we would like to fine grained this access and we would like to provide
selective public member functions or read functions or get methods or write functions or
set methods on the data that we have protected by making them private.
So, I just illustrate the whole idea in terms of an example, here is a class which I just call
it as a class MyClass which is not very important. There are four data members assumed
and I have not used any access specifier after the beginning of the class definition here
which means that by default these data members are private there in, and these data
members are intended in a way that the first data members read write is a data member
which, as I being a data member it is private so nobody can directly come and change its
value, but in terms of its use I would like to read and write its value. For example, this is
a member like a re components of a complex number, im component of a complex
number or so, I would need to read and set the value of this component if I am reading a
complex number. If I am writing the current value of a complex number I will need to
read the re, im component and then so on. A large number of data member aggregatemembers turned out to be read write. So, I need to provide some mechanism by which I
should be able to do that and the simple way to do this is to provide a pair of get-set
functions.
What is the get, set function do? A get function say on the read write on this variable say
has a name getReadWrite, it is simply takes this data member and returns it. This method
is kept in the public space, so any external function or any other member functions of
any other class can call the getReadWrite functions seamlessly, because it is available in
the public space. And this in turn will access the private member and return its value. So
in about a way we are selectively making this the value of this known to the external
world with the control that whenever somebody has to do that somebody has to go
through this particular (Refer Time: 05:46). For example, one what is the basic difference
between providing this get and let us say similarly I have a set which can take a value v
and actually a science is valued to the data members read write. So basically, if I have get
and set both then I can read as well as write the value of this variable readWrite.
Now you will wonder an (Refer Time: 06:14) question has to why do you want to make
this private and then put a pair of public methods which can get and set this, we could
have just made this public and anybody could have change that. But yes, in terms of read
write this is similar, but there is a major difference because if I put it in public then the
object will never get to know, when it is being this particular data member is being read
or when it is being read. But if it is done through a function is a method then when it is
being read I can also do some computation here. When is being written I can also do
some computation before or after this value is written it to. So, the object will always be
aware that the value of read write has been changed or the value of read write has been
read by somebody. So, it is not exactly seem as to putting this data member as a public
access.
Now, coming to the other data members if we look into the next one we want to just
make it read only. So, there is a lot of in terms of any model different real-world data
types, encapsulations we will find that there are lot of data which is read only like date of
birth. Date of birth of a person cannot keep on changing so it should be set to something
when I create the object for that person and after that it should not be possible to change,is the best way to control that would be to make this a with the private access and then
allow just a get function on it. So, which will allow somebody to read the date of birth
and possibly compute age of that person or read the employee Id and check out, read the
roll number of the student, and find the grade of the student and so on. All these get
function will allow us to get that data but will not be able to change that data. So, which
means that this particular if I just provide the get function and the responding data
becomes read only data.
Once you get this then obviously rest becomes very straight forward it is just completing
the all possible combinations I can have a right only variable if you just have a set
method on that variable but there is no get method do not wonder variables can be write
only there are several variables which can be write only. One very common example is
password, because password is so sensitive that normally you would not like to allow
any mechanism at all to read a password all that you might want, might allow will have
to allow is the is a mechanism to change the password when needed. So, password is
something which you just write you never read that values. You can just have only set
and not no get functions which makes it a write only.
Similarly, in the final group you may have invisible members like the top of the stack or
the data array of the stack you just do not want to know how the stack operates all that
you want to know is push, pop, top and empty you should work. So, there should be no
method at all either to read the value of top or data or to change/set the value of top or
data, and therefore there should be no set-get methods on that. So, with this set-get idiom
as you can see that we can create a very fine grain control on the accessibility of the data
members and similar accessibility of different methods can also be done, but certainly
get-set is a is a typical idiom that works for data members to allow you to do more finite
things.(Refer Slide Time: 10:05)
With this we will close on this module. In this module we have understood access
specifiers how they help to control visibility of the class members, the public, and the
private. They can be used as we have seen to hide information about the implementation
of a class while exposing the behavior through the interface and we have specifically
seen that get-set methods a specific idiom is often used in C++ to provide very fine grain
control on the interface in terms of what access to the data members you want to provide
in your design.
