Software Engineering
Prof. Rajib Mall
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 07
Life Cycle Model (Contd.)
Welcome to this lecture. In the last lecture we had discussed about some basic concepts
about the Life Cycle Models. Now, we look at some of the well accepted life cycle
models.
(Refer Slide Time: 00:37)
Many life cycles models have been proposed, the popular ones are waterfall, V model,
evolutionary model, prototyping model and spiral model these have existed for quite
some time and we will call this as the traditional models.
In the recent years, the agile models have come into being. We will see the difference
between the traditional model and the agile model and how this has come into being.
Why these have become much more suitable for modern projects and etc.
(Refer Slide Time: 01:31)
A software lifecycle is also known as a software process. It’s a series of identifiable
stages that a software product undergoes during its lifetime.
What are stages? The stages typically are the feasibility study, requirements analysis,
specification, design, coding, testing and maintenance.
(Refer Slide Time: 02:58)
The most intuitive lifecycle model is called as the classical waterfall model. It matches
very closely to the model that we discussed in the last lecture.
But, how exactly software’s have developed.
For the development, we need to design based on the specification, code based on the
design then test it and after testing is complete, install it and if there are any difficulties,
problems or enhancements required then we should change and finally retire.
The classical waterfall model matches closely to this intuitive development style. The
phases consists of the feasibility study, requirements analysis & specification, design,
coding & unit testing, integration and system testing & maintenance.
But how the development should proceed? Initially, you do the feasibility study then the
requirements analysis and specification. Based on the requirements, you do the design
then code and unit test and then move to next stage that is integration and system testing
and finally it’s delivered. This matches very closely to the intuitive model that we had
discussed.
(Refer Slide Time: 05:06)
If we represent the classical waterfall model in a diagrammatical form, we will have
feasibility study followed by requirements analysis followed by design, coding and once
coding is complete you will carry out the testing and maintenance. It is the simplest and
the most intuitive development style. 
Even though this model is very easy to understand and if you understand this model, it
becomes easy to understand the other models. Still, this model is more of an idealistic
model as it is not really used in real projects & we will investigate the reason later.
(Refer Slide Time: 06:04)
In the classical waterfall model, there are many phases.
Among all lifecycle phases the maintenance phase actually requires the maximum effort
because the development might complete within couple of months but the maintenance
goes on for years together and for almost every software the maintenance requires much
more effort than the development effort.
Similarly, among the development phases the testing phase typically consumes the
maximum effort. If you plot the effort graph for a typical project you can see that the
maintenance requires much more effort.
Thus, the development phases testing requires the largest effort. Coding & design
requires less effort on the requirements specification. 
(Refer Slide Time: 08:01)
The classical waterfall model or any other model used to document such a model must
not only have the diagrammatic representation but also have the entry and exit criteria.
What are the methodologies that are used in different phases and the outputs that is
produced in every phase and is termed as the process model.
(Refer Slide Time: 08:45)
Every good organization documents the process model and gives it to the developers.
The new developers are asked to master the development process before they start the
development of the software. 
(Refer Slide Time: 09:11)
Looking into the different stages briefly. The first activity in the classical waterfall
model is the feasibility study. In the feasibility study there are 3 main aspects that are
determined, i.e.; whether the software that to be developed is economically feasible,
whether the development effort and the cost that will be spent on developing software is
it worth and lastly whether the developing organization has the technical competence
required to develop the software or not.
This is also termed as the cost benefit analysis.
Considering the example for the development of some satellite communication. As the
developers do not know how to use satellite communication and even write programs for
satellite communication, they will find it technically infeasible.
The third feasibility that needs to be determined during the feasibility study stage is
scheduled feasibility. The time by which the customer requires the product to be
delivered and the development involved to complete the work as per the required time.
During the feasibility study, the project manager needs to determine 3 types of
feasibility. Whether it is cost wise feasible, whether it can be done and the scheduled
feasibility (i.e. whether it can be done in time or not). 
(Refer Slide Time: 11:38)
Let’s look how exactly the feasibility study can be carried out. The first thing is to
roughly understand the requirements of the software and the customer requirements.
What are the features of the software? (I.e. Comprising of different sort of data, the
volume, the processing that needs to be done & finally the code to be written.)
What is the output to be produced by the system and the various constraints & behavior
of the system? Considering an example, whether the backup needs to be kept or whether
the downtime requirement is very high or whether the data to be input from different
locations of the company. These are some of the different constraints.
(Refer Slide Time: 13:20)
Once the requirements are understood then the project manager likes to execute it. As per
the proposed alternate solution you need to find out the cost for its solution, do the cost
benefit analysis, check whether schedule wise it is technically feasible and then find out
the best solution and discuss with the customer and determine whether to execute or
abandon the project.
Looking at a case study that will help us appreciate what are the work or the activities
that needs to be undertaken during the feasibility study phase. Let’s take a project of the
special provident scheme for the coalfields limited, which itself is a large company
having large number of employees exceeding 50,000. Now, the company has many
casual laborers and mining is a risky profession, casualties are high, people get injured,
killed even though there is a provident fund but the settlement time is high. Therefore,
the company feels that it needs a special provident fund which can fasten the
disbursement of the benefits at the earliest.
The company invites software vendors to develop software for the special provident fund
scheme. Many companies show interest and the project manager visits the main office of
the company & try to understand what are the functionalities that is required.
(Refer Slide Time: 15:30)
There is a formula for how much compensation is to be paid. What are the restrictions on
the compensation under which conditions compensation will not be paid and etc.
The manager might visit some mine sites and finds out how the data will be input, that is
what are the details of the employees, what is their contribution on a daily weekly or
monthly basis and after understanding the complete situation he tries to propose an
alternate solution.
The alternate solutions proposes that the data needs to be maintained locally at the mine
sites and periodically the data will be transferred to the main office (I.e. there will be
computers at the mine site which will maintain the data in each mine and there will be a
main computer & main server at the head office and depending on the request it will
provide the answers).
The other solution might be of transmitting the data as soon as it gets entered or at the
end of the day to the mine site. All these data will be maintained at the head office.
Instant results can be provided as here the communication costs are less but there is a
delay and data are not up to date at the main office.
To do a cost benefit analysis for each alternate solution, initially find out what is suitable
to the coalfield officials and then find the cost for its solution and determine the best
solution & check whether that is acceptable to the organization & whether there is 
technical competence to develop the solution or whether it can be developed within the
timeline and based on this the decision will be taken (no go decision).
Just to summarize, the first thing during feasibility study is to understand the work and
the features required. What are the data and how they will be input? What is the
processing time and the constraints and etc. Once the rough understanding of the
requirements is done, find out what are the best ways to solve it as there can be many
alternate solutions.
Examine the cost implications of different solutions & find out the best solution, present
it to the customer & take their feedback.
If everything goes fine and is acceptable to the officials, the project manager will take a
go decision and the high-level solution that has been defined will be used by the
developers and the development will proceed in this style.
But there might be a situation where the technical competence is not there with the
company or maybe the timeline by which the company needs it would be difficult to
meet and hence the project manager might take a no-go decision and abandon the
project.
(Refer Slide Time: 21:12)
The activities during the feasibility study, we can summarize that the work out on an
overall understanding of the problem. Formulate the different solution strategies, propose 
alternate solutions and determine the cost in terms of the resource required per cost of
development and the development time.
(Refer Slide Time: 21:38)
Form a cost benefit analysis, find out the best solution and then decide whether to go
ahead with the project or abandon because of high cost resources, constraints or technical
reasons.
(Refer Slide Time: 21:57)
The cost of a project is not only the development cost but also consists of the operational
costs.
Consider an educational institute wants to have an automated solution. It is not just
developing the software but also setting up the required infrastructure. Also, the
operational cost like who will enter the data, we will take the backup, maintenance and
will be taken into account.
An organization trying to deploy an IT solution would identify all these costs and the
cost of the solution would be the sum of the development cost setup and operational cost.
Finally, you have to identify the benefits that you will accrue from this automation and
then check whether the benefits are greater than the cost.
(Refer Slide Time: 23:08)
For a project to be taken up by an organization, the benefits must outweigh the costs. The
costs are the development operation setup costs & the benefits. Some of them are
quantifiable and some of them may be non-quantifiable. For example, let’s say we want
to automate the book-keeping activities in an educational institute.
Some of the benefits are quantifiable that how much manpower is saved by automating it
but some are non-quantifiable. For example, the results may come out faster, the students
may benefit. But we cannot really put a cost on through this & it’s difficult to quantify. 
(Refer Slide Time: 24:18)
After the feasibility study is over, typically the project manager prepares a ‘business
case’. The business case basically mentions the costs and the benefits & then presents it
to the top management about the cost implications and the benefits.
(Refer Slide Time: 25:03)
Typically, a good business case should touch upon the following points out of which one
is the executive summary that what exactly is done is to be taken up to the top
management to understand.
The project background that under what circumstances the need for the project arouse
and then the business opportunity that what exactly will be the benefit? What difference
it will make and how much it will cost for the development, implementation, set of
trainings, operations and the benefits in terms of revenue generation, cost reduction, nonquantifiable benefits and even the risks.
The risks can be that the development costs will be much higher than estimated. Maybe,
it will take more time than what is estimated. After it is developed, it may not be liked by
the stakeholders and they may not use it. But there must be some arguments or plan
regarding how these different threats or risks will be contained or handled and these are
the different sections for the effective business cases.
(Refer Slide Time: 28:03)
We have so far looked at the feasibility study phase, as we look at the requirement
analysis that the design, coding, testing and maintenance. But here it looks like a cascade
of waterfall, the water is falling from one level to the next level and that is known as the
waterfall model.
The first stage is the feasibility study and the second stage is the requirements analysis
and specification. We will start discussing very briefly about the activities done in
requirement analysis as we will continue the discussion in the next lecture. Thank you. 
