1.5 The rest of the UNIX system
There's much more to the UNIX system than we've addressed in this
chapter, but then there's much more to this book. By now, you should feel
comfortable with the system and, particularly, with th manual. When you
have specific questions about when or how to use commands, the manual is the
place to look.
It is also worth browsing in the manual occasionally, to refresh your
knowledge of familiar commands and to discover new ones. The manual
describes many programs we won't illustrate, including compilers for languages
like FORTRAN 77; calculator programs such as be(l); eu(l) and uuep(l) for
inter-machine communication; graphics packages; statistics programs; and esoterica such as uni ts( 1).
As we've said before, this book does not replace the manual, it supplernents
it. In the chapters that follow we will look at pieces and programs of the UNIX
system, starting from the information in the manual but following the threads
that connect the components. Although the program interrelationships are
never made explicit in the manual, they form the fabric of the UNIX programming environment.
History and bibliographic notes
The original UNIX paper is by D. M. Ritchie and K. L. Thompson: "The
UNIX Time-sharing System," Communications of the ACM, July, 1974, and
reprinted in CACM, January, 1983. (Page 89 of the reprint is in the March
1983 issue.) This overview of the system for people interested in operating
systems is worth reading by anyone who programs.
The Bell System Technical Journal (BSTJ) speciaJ issue on the UNIX system
(July, 1978) contains many papers describing subsequent developments, and
some retrospective material, including an update of the original CACM paper
by Ritchie and Thompson. A second special issue of the BST J, containing new
UNIX papers, is scheduled to be published in 1984.
"The UNIX Programming Environment," by B. W. Kernighan and J. R.
Mashey (IEEE Computer Magazine, April, 1981), attempts to convey the essential features of the system for programmers.
The UNIX Programmer's Manual, in whatever version is appropriate for your
system, lists commands, system routines and interfaces, file formats, and
maintenance procedures. You can't live without this for long, although you
will probably only need to read parts of Volume 1 until you start programming. Volume 1 of the 7th Edition manual is published by Holt, Rinehart and
Winston.
Volume 2 of the UNIX Programmer's Manual is called "Documents for Use
with the UNIX Time-sharing System" and contains tutorials and reference
manuals for major commands. In particular, it describes document preparation
programs and program development tools at some length. You will want to
read most of this eventually.
A UNIX Primer, by Ann and Nico Lomuto (Prentice-Hall, 1983), is a good
introduction for raw beginners, especially non-programmers.

