[MUSIC] Gorbachev's first and
significant achievements, actually, were not on the domestic front but
in their foreign policy. It turned out that
changing Soviet stance in world affairs in foreign
policy was a great deal easier than transforming Soviet economy
and society and political order. And indeed,
Gorbachev came into office at a time of heightened international tensions. As a consequence of Soviet
adventure in Afghanistan, Soviets shooting down the Korean airplane, as a result of Ronald Reagan appearing in American political sphere. And the international tension, international relations
were worse when Gorbachev came into power than in
the previous several years. And Gorbachev was
determined to remedy this. He wanted to remedy this for, partially, because his understanding
that the Soviet economy has to somehow be coordinated
with the rest of the world. For which, relaxation of international
tensions were necessary, for which it was necessary to
engage the West in terms of credit, matter of acquiring technology. But beyond that, he talked about Russia belonging to a common European home. And there is every reason to believe
that his convictions were genuine. Russia returning to
the community of nations, and consequently, he was willing to engage,
giving concessions. Also it was essential to
reduce Soviet expenditures on the military because it presented such a heavy burden on the economy as a whole. As I mentioned before,
when Gorbachev came into office, about 25% of the gross national
product was devoted to the military which was an enormous burden. So Gorbachev had two famous
meetings with Ronald Reagan. Second one in Reykjavík in
the terms of which the Soviets, that is Gorbachev, gave major concessions. And the relaxation of
international tensions, the improvement of relations
with Europe came about mainly because of Soviet concessions. Soviet concessions, for example, in deploying interrange missiles which Western European countries
considered threat to their security. And these according to
the new terms of agreement were withdrawn beyond
the Ural Mountains and, This seemed to be
a significant concession. The real most significant
changes which were taking place in Eastern Europe,
Eastern Europe which was regarded as the, shall we say,
the outer defenses of the empire. That is the Eastern European
communist countries that provided a security zone in as much as hostile power did not could not establish bases that direct most strategic
are the Soviet borders in the west. And what was happening here was
perhaps the most extraordinary change. Gorbachev went into Eastern European countries where he represented change. He went to East Germany and said that those who cannot
change will be losing. And Gorbachev was received
with great enthusiasm by the East German people which
is a remarkable phenomenon that it was really the leader
of the occupying power which came to stand for liberal transformation
against their own conservative leaders. And the same things happened
in country after country. The most significant,
very significant one, was that the Hungarian leadership came to be increasingly liberal really
sensing the change atmosphere. And East Germans frequently
came to Hungary for the summer as a place for summer vacation. And the Hungarian regime
explicitly allowed them to cross from the Hungarian
border into Austria. And so, the East Germans who were
driving their Trabant cars into Hungary, abandoned their Trabant at the Austrian
borders and walked over into Austria. Gorbachev was aware of this and
allowed this. It was a major transformation
in as much as, if you were not happy in East Germany now,
you could simply walk away. And that ultimately resulted in
the collapse of the East German regime. Because the regime operated under the
principle that you have to make it here, you have no choice. And once choice existed, the regime's
legitimacy was seriously undermined and ultimately led to the collapse
of the German regime. The other Eastern European countries, and
some were different times, in Poland and in Hungary, fairly easily and
in a fairly democratic means, simply the communists
allowed themselves to be voted out of office and
transformed themselves into socialists. And some politically survived, and some did not, but
the multiparty regimes were established. Now how could Gorbachev allow this? Why did he allow this? Well of course, we can only speculate. I think that he did not appreciate how
thin the legitimacy of these regimes were. Perhaps he assumed that these regimes,
in fact, acquired a legitimacy on their own and can exist
without the threat of Soviet troops. In fact this was not the case. These regimes could not have existed
without the threat of Soviet intervention. Now this had far reaching consequences. Not only now Eastern Europe
could go their own way but the message was that,
well if the Hungarians can have free elections, why couldn't we
in Estonia have the same? And what was happening was
this disintegration from Eastern Europe affected what was
going on in the Soviet Union. Probably Gorbachev did not
appreciate the degree and strength of nationalism which has existed. And he, later on, blamed himself for it. For example, when it became just too self evident
that the Central Asian communist leaders were corrupt beyond
belief, really in an absolutely, ridiculous fashion
exhibited their power and wealth, Gorbachev removed the head
of the Khazar Party Organization which resulted almost in a riot. It turned out that these national
minorities preferred to be administered by their own
scoundrels rather than Russians whom Gorbachev sent out
to take their place. And the national hostilities
which had been buried under heavy handed Soviet Moscow
intervention now bubbled to the surface. It turned out that the Armenians
didn't like the Azeris, and the Azeris didn't like the Armenians. And indeed, within Azerbaijan, there was a little enclave of Armenian population, the Nagorno-Karabakh. And fighting broke out, and this fighting has been
going on ever since. Riots in Georgia,
riots in Azerbaijan in Baku, Soviet troops were suppressing it. And this was the occasion when Gorbachev faced the task of shall
we use Soviet troops to restore order and
shoot at our people, or not? And Gorbachev's great moral achievement
was that he made the correct choice. Rather allow the regimes to go out,
go down, rather than shooting at their own people. And in this respect,
he was similar to other leaders of Soviet power in Hungary, Dubcek in Czechoslovakia in 1968. That is, people who believed and continued
to believe In the socialist order. However, they refused to
shoot at their own people and thereby allowed themselves
to go out of existence. So what was going on Eastern Europe
penetrated first into the Baltic states. Elections were to be held. Elections were held in 1991 whether we should have lived within the Soviet order, in a reformed Soviet free order in
which majorities voted for it, yes? And then ultimately,
a meeting was to be called in the summer of 1991 to discuss
the nationality issue. What kind of relations can there be, should there be among
the states of the Soviet Union? And this was the starting point of the great event of August 1991 which ultimately resulted to the dissolution of the Soviet Union. [MUSIC]