[MUSIC] I would like to talk about
the collapse of the Soviet Union, and what kind of economic, political, and social order emerged in the 1990s. A crucial moment came
about in August 1991. When Gorbachev wanted to bring
together representatives of the various nationalities,
in order to reorganize the Soviet Union, by giving greater autonomy
to the various republics. Some in the leadership found
this a frightening prospect, and used the opportunity to
attempt a coup, a coup d’état. Gorbachev himself was in Crimea
on vacation, it was August, and the people actually
were appointed by him. But who were fearful of the reforms
introduced by Gorbachev, and attempted reaction, recoup d'état, reaction in the sense of attempting
to bring back what they thought was, what were the glorious
days of the Soviet Union. The coup failed, failed partially because those who attempted to do so were Yanayev, Pugo, the head of the KGB,
very untalented, very uncharismatic individuals. And then when they attempted,
when they announced the coup in the public setting,
it was clear that they were fearful, unimpressive individuals lacking charisma. But the real reason that
the coup failed is because, there was no constituency behind them. And this is what is is so
important for us to understand what happened in August 1991, which we can
date as the end of the Soviet Union, even though the ultimate and legal demise only occurred at the end
of December of the same year. After that, the Soviet Union, for
all practical purposes, ceased to exist. But what we need to understand,
that the two opposing forces. Each were weak, that is,
it was not people who attempted a coup d'état and
they met strong powerful resistance. In fact,
the country was descending into anarchy. But what exactly happened? These people announced the coup. Yeltsin, but it's Yeltsin who had been
elected President of the Russian Republic, and thereby created for
himself a most significant office, announced the resistance with a coup. And then his most remarkable,
most famous achievement, on the top of a tank, announced, denounced the people who made the coup, and ultimately had them arrested,
and the coup failed. Now, Gorbachev's role
in this is 100% clear, but it is most likely that
Gorbachev disapproved of the coup. The people who carried out
the coup d'etat spoke in his name. But in effect, and
Gorbachev did not announce his support, he was detained in the Crimea, and could return to Moscow only after the
organizers of the coup had been arrested. Now, the really significant
issues which we have to consider, why,
why did the Soviet Union collapse? It seems to me because
the leadership could not deal with three interrelated,
fundamental issues. One, and really the most
significant was the economy. After all, the source of the reform,
the need for the reforms, which Gorbachev carried out,
was in order to improve the economy. The economy was sputtering from
the second half of the 1970s. And Gorbachev and
Gorbachev's reformers attempted to make changes and the changes did not work. The changes did not work because what he
wanted to achieve was not achievable. Namely, combining a planned
economy with free markets. These were irreconcilable goals. And so what happened was that
various reform plans were discussed, each reform plans would have called for
major political change, which ultimately Gorbachev
failed to support. And so there were constant discussions,
Gorbachev and people around him understood that
whatever change would be introduced, at least in the short run
would be very painful. So the situation, economic situation from
the point of view of the Soviet people, was getting worse and worse, and the
existing government could not solve it. The second issue, related to the first,
was remaking the political system. Again, the goals, while understandable,
were unachievable. Namely, retaining the leading
role of the Communist party and the role of the Communist party
running the economy on the one hand, and on the other, introduce political, intellectual freedom where
there could be elections held, in which different candidates
enunciated different programs. Again, this was absolutely contrary to
the very idea of the Communist party, and consequently, what you ended
up with is a political system which was deteriorating into anarchy. The third issue which the regime could
not solve, was the nationality question. In as much as, as long as
the Soviet power was functioning, nationality question, but
there under the surface, nonetheless it was taken for
granted that any attempt of asserting autonomy or
sovereignty would be suppressed. But in the course of the 1990 and 91, it became clear that the regime was
unwilling to carry out suppression. And the very weakness of the regime
encouraged nationalities all over the country to make demands. And indeed, the very purpose
of the meeting with Gorbachev was calling together for, August 19th,
1991, was to resolve that issue. And the issue was not resolvable. That is the idea of
creating free republics, which work together in a happy unity,
was not resolvable. So, what we are left
with is that the changes, which would occur, did not come
about as a result of public demand. Indeed, what is remarkable is that
how little the Russian people were, well shall I say the people of
the Soviet Union were involved in carrying out those fundamental changes. What we deal with here,
is as as we have dealt within the past, is really descend into anarchy,
rather than two powerful, competing forces would emerge,
and fighting against one another. So, when the coup was put down,
the political situation, it altogether changed. Yeltsin announced dissolution of the
Communist Party of the Russian Republic, which was, well of course the role
of the Russian Republic within the Soviet Union was dominant,
needless to say. The Komsomol, the Communist Youth
Organization dissolved itself. And, for a moment at least in some
circles there was jubilation, expectation of now we will develop a free political system and
a functioning economy. Well, I need to add that
at the end of December, representatives from the Ukraine, and from Belarus, and
with Yeltsin's participation decided to dissolve the Soviet Union. Gorbachev, who had been
President of the Republic, now found himself without a job,
his office simply disappeared. And now with the, beginning of 91, a new era began, the Yeltsin era. [MUSIC]