[MUSIC] Yeltsin, unlike Gorbachev,
was willing to listen to the most radical of
the economic reformers, and was willing to accept
the recommendation of putting the Russian
economy on a market basis. What this meant, in concrete terms,
was something extraordinary. How do you privatize an economy of
the size of the Soviet economy? It's never been tried. Well, not quite, the Russian reformers, Yegor Gaidar was the most significant and most intelligent and
attractive of these reformers. Had very much in mind the Polish example,
where the privatization, so-called shock therapy,
was carried out successfully. However, the situation of
the Soviet Union was very different. Poland, after all, still had the memory
of a free enterprise market economy. And more significantly, Polish, Eastern European people
approved of the market economy, approved of the idea of private property. This was not the case
of among the Russians. Surveys time and
again through our days show a great skepticism on the part
of the Russian people, of ideas on which capitalism is based. Well, nonetheless,
in order to have a hope for improving the Soviet economy, indeed privatization
had to be carried out. What did it mean in concrete terms? Obviously there are no wealthy
investors who would buy factories and make factories work better. The factories were outdated, unable to
compete under international market. And what was their value? Nobody has carried out a privatization, even on a much smaller scale, without injustice, without corruption. Because some people could benefit,
and most people would be, at least in the short run, greatly harmed. What did it mean in concrete terms? Factories, which existed on government support, had to be withdrawn. Well, that meant large scale unemployment, which have concrete
political consequences. So the reformers came
up with the idea that the people of the Soviet Union
would all be given shares. And a share of worth of 100,000 rubles,
I believe, which would be the equivalent
of something like $20. And the hope was that they would invest
in the factories where they're working. And consequently, as shareholders,
everybody in the world would have an interest in the performance
of the factories in which they work. In reality, not surprisingly,
it didn't work out this way. Ponzi schemes came into existence. Some people bought up the shares. The shares became, in some instances, worthless. And Soviet people did not benefit from, Russian people did not
benefit from having shares in factories which were not producing for
profit in any case. Well, privatization market
economy meant freeing of prices. The prices in the Soviet economy were irrational in the sense that they had very
little to do with the cost of production. Cost of bread was subsidized. Indeed, it was very difficult
to know what the values, which produced in a state
organized economy, what those values in fact really were. So, what was happening was
enormous drop in production, enormous drop in standard of living. The per capita income in the course
of the 1990s dropped to one-half. Which, in the Russian case, of course, starting out with a very low base,
meant genuine economic misery. Economic misery in every
sense of the word. Apartments were privatized, which meant that bans, criminal bans, forced people to sell their apartments for
nothing. And then people found
themselves in the street. The food supply diminished. The factories could not
produce in an open market. And foreign goods inundated the country because of the freedom of commerce, which resulted the factories
could not produce. Which resulted in closing down
factories and unemployment. But to return to
the organization of the economy, what was happening was that for
political reasons, not all goods could be
evaluated on the free market, such as bread continued to be supported. And most significantly oil, energy, came to be supported,
in as much as the cost of Russian oil. Russia being the largest
oil producer in the world. The cost of Russian oil for
domestic consumption was 1% of that of world market prices. So some clever people could buy
it up in the Russian market and sell it in the foreign market and
making great fortune. Another way people could make
money is that the government were afraid, of course,
of closing down all factories and gave support, financial support to factory managers in order
to make the factories run. Now, some clever factory
managers took the money, immediately converted it to dollars. And then in a month time,
when they were to pay their workers, reconverted into ruble. And since the average monthly
inflation was astronomical, they made a lot of money. The point is that this transformation enabled some people to
come away very rich. Now, the Russian people,
with very little respect for market economy,
private property, capitalism, what they saw seemingly
justified their worst fears of what capitalism was and
what free market meant. Unfettered competition was not something
which they would want to take part of. What is significant for us,
that the 1990s for the people of Russia, Soviet Union,
it varied from republic to republic. Though, the Ukraine and Belarus did
know better than Russia itself. The Baltic states now regained
their sovereignty and, indeed, they received support and
they did much better. Central Asia did even
worse than Russia itself. And Russia was really
indescribable misery. And also, this created something
of a social revolution. That is, different segments of the population
were harmed to a different extent. Ironically, during intelligentsia,
which had been the most vocal critics of the whole
Soviet system were particularly hard hit. Universities were not supported. And of course, they lived, like in
the past, on support from the state. And the state was not able to do that. The consequence was that a large
number of Russian scientists, now the borders were free,
could go, and did go. And that caused long-term damage for Soviet intellectual and economic life in the fairly short-term. It should be pointed out,
on the positive side, that for the first time,
genuine intellectual freedom did exist. Varieties of newspapers were published,
expressing different points of view. The Russian people now
could travel abroad. And indeed, many of them escaped. If you were a violin player and
now you played in the Barshai Orchestra, but the orchestra could
not pay you as well, so you may not be able to make it
somewhere in New York or London. But a Greek orchestra
could pay you better. And what you were left
with is that talented, ambitious people were left behind,
or left. And what was left behind, was, well, it would be too strong to
say was there residue. But the loss for
Russian intellectual culture life was something very significant and
lasting. Criminality flourished. Flourished in the sense that the guards, the police, never very reliable and successful in Soviet circumstances. The laws which were there were not capable of dealing with contracts for which there had been no need for the past. And consequently,
what we're left with is a degree of lawlessness which had not existed
even in the Soviet regime. The consequence of that was that criminal
bands took on themselves protection, for which they were paid. And if you did open a little kiosk
somewhere in the streets of the capitol, and you were afraid that criminal bands
will come and take your possessions away, you hired some other criminals and
pay them protection. This is a well known phenomenon. It existed not only in Russia but
before and after, in other places. But what you were left
with is economic misery. And the social transformation in
the sense that some people did very well. And who would do well had very little
to do with previous social standing. That is, you were a university professor. Now, your salary became practically
worthless, at this time of inflation. Your daughter on the other hand,
could get a job, because she knew English. Get a job in a multi-national office,
which opened in Moscow to sell, let us say, Mercedez-Benzs's, which Moscow
came to have the largest number anywhere. She made a very good salary. She was paid in dollars,
was not concerned about the inflation. And so
her father who had been a famous man, a famous intellectual, came to live on what his
daughter could provide. And the social consequences of this social
revolution were really far-reaching and very difficult for
outsiders to comprehend. And of course, I shouldn't say of course, it is really the pensionnaires
who were hurt the most. In as much as pensions in the time of
great inflation came to be useless. So, you saw people in
the streets of Moscow, old people who came to the streets
to sell their possessions, or whatever they could sell
in order to make a living. The consequence of that was, the decline
of the standard of living was measurable. Most significant, most striking is
the incredible drop in life expectancy. Life expectancy for
Russian males declined from 63, which was in international
standards a rather low life expectancy,
declined to 58 by the end of the decade. Now female life expectancy also
declined but not as drastically. And their explanation for
that is that the man drank. The man did not have the resources for the
enormously changed social circumstances. But as far as I know,
in no society was such a decline of life expectancy at peacetime. [MUSIC]