About University Physics

University Physics is designed for the two or three - semester calculus - based physics course. The text has been developed to meet the scope and sequence of most university physics courses and provides a foundation for a career in mathematics, science, or engineering. The book provides an important opportunity for students to learn the core concepts of physics and understand how those concepts apply to their lives and to the world around them.

Due to the comprehensive nature of the material, we are offering the book in three volumes for flexibility and efficiency.

Coverage and scope

Our University Physics textbook adheres to the scope and sequence of most two and three semester physics courses nationwide. We have worked to make physics interesting and accessible to students while maintaining the mathematical rigor inherent in the subject. With this objective in mind, the content of this textbook has been developed and arranged to provide a logical progression from fundamental to more advanced concepts, building upon what students have already learned and emphasizing connections between topics and between theory and applications. The goal of each section is to enable students not just to recognize concepts, but to work with them in ways that will be useful in later courses and future careers. The organization and pedagogical features were developed and vetted with feedback from science educators dedicated to the project.

VOLUME I

Unit 1: Mechanics

Chapter 1: Units and Measurement
Chapter 2: Vectors
Chapter 3: Motion Along a Straight Line
Chapter 4: Motion in Two and Three Dimensions
Chapter 5: Newton’s Laws of Motion
Chapter 6: Applications of Newton’s Laws
Chapter 7: Work and Kinetic Energy
Chapter 8: Potential Energy and Conservation of Energy
Chapter 9: Linear Momentum and Collisions
Chapter 10: Fixed-Axis Rotation
Chapter 11: Angular Momentum
Chapter 12: Static Equilibrium and Elasticity
Chapter 13: Gravitation
Chapter 14: Fluid Mechanics


Unit 2: Waves and Acoustics
Chapter 15: Oscillations
Chapter 16: Waves
Chapter 17: Sound


VOLUME II

Unit 1: Thermodynamics
Chapter 1: Temperature and Heat
Chapter 2: The Kinetic Theory of Gases
Chapter 3: The First Law of Thermodynamics
Chapter 4: The Second Law of Thermodynamics

Unit 2: Electricity and Magnetism
Chapter 5: Electric Charges and Fields
Chapter 6: Gauss’s Law
Chapter 7: Electric Potential
Chapter 8: Capacitance
Chapter 9: Current and Resistance
Chapter 10: Direct - Current Circuits
Chapter 11: Magnetic Forces and Fields
Chapter 12: Sources of Magnetic Fields
Chapter 13: Electromagnetic Induction
Chapter 14: Inductance
Chapter 15: Alternating - Current Circuits
Chapter 16: Electromagnetic Waves

VOLUME III

Unit 1: Optics
Chapter 1: The Nature of Light
Chapter 2: Geometric Optics and Image Formation
Chapter 3: Interference
Chapter 4: Diffraction

Unit 2: Modern Physics
Chapter 5: Relativity
Chapter 6: Photons and Matter Waves
Chapter 7: Quantum Mechanics
Chapter 8: Atomic Structure
Chapter 9: Condensed Matter Physics
Chapter 10: Nuclear Physics
Chapter 11: Particle Physics and Cosmology

Pedagogical foundation

Throughout University Physics you will find derivations of concepts that present classical ideas and techniques, as well as modern applications and methods. Most chapters start with observations or experiments that place the material in a context of physical experience. Presentations and explanations rely on years of classroom experience on the part of long-time physics professors, striving for a balance of clarity and rigor that has proven successful with their students. Throughout the text, links enable students to review earlier material and then return to the present discussion, reinforcing connections between topics. Key historical figures and experiments are discussed in the main text (rather than in boxes or sidebars), maintaining a focus on the development of physical intuition. Key ideas, definitions, and equations are highlighted in the text and listed in summary form at the end of each chapter. Examples and chapter-opening images often include contemporary applications from daily life or modern science and engineering that students can relate to, from smart phones to the internet to GPS devices.

Assessments that reinforce key concepts
In-chapter Examples generally follow a three-part format of Strategy, Solution, and Significance to emphasize how to approach a problem, how to work with the equations, and how to check and generalize the result. Examples are often followed by Check Your Understanding questions and answers to help reinforce for students the important ideas of the examples. Problem-Solving Strategies in each chapter break down methods of approaching various types of problems into steps students can follow for guidance. The book also includes exercises at the end of each chapter so students can practice what they’ve learned.

Conceptual questions do not require calculation but test student learning of the key concepts.
Problems categorized by section test student problem-solving skills and the ability to apply ideas to practical situations.
Additional Problems apply knowledge across the chapter, forcing students to identify what concepts and equations are appropriate for solving given problems. Randomly located throughout the problems are Unreasonable Results exercises that ask students to evaluate the answer to a problem and explain why it is not reasonable and what assumptions made might not be correct.
Challenge Problems extend text ideas to interesting but difficult situations.
Answers for selected exercises are available in an Answer Key at the end of the book.

