SPEAKER 1: We've talked about position and displacement. Believe it or not, there's a third quantity to describe positions and changes in positions, and that is distance. Distance is how far an object actually travels. So, to think about distance, we're going to do our third example. Example three of Hal's motions. And this one is, we're going to take the ramp. We're going to tilt it. Hal is going to start at 10 centimeters. Let's say this is the origin. This is zero, and here's 10. I'm going to push him up to 40 centimeters, maybe a little higher. There's 40 centimeters. He's going to go all the back to zero. Let's look at it again. He started at 10. This is zero, started at 10. Went up to about 40, and then made it back down to zero. Let's plot it, draw it, do the equations, and everything. First, we can draw the demo real quick, just to make sure you see what's going on. All right. So, in this case, here's Hal. Hal started there at 10, but this is where I caught him, at 0, and he's going to make his way up to 40. Just so it's clear, even though I tilted it, now we're just making the x-axis also be tilted. There's the origin of the x-axis, and he's moving up the tilt. No need to do trig yet. We pushed him up, and he went up this way, and then he came back down this way. That was the path. Let's look at the graph. The kinematics plot would have time there and x there. This is the origin. We know he started at time equals 0. He started at 10, and he's going to make his way up to 40. It's sort of this smooth transition thing. We're getting ahead of ourselves. He was accelerating under a force, but I can kind of draw what it's going to look like. It's going to look like this. He's going to start at 10, make his way up to 40, and then smoothly come down. It should be more curved than that, down to zero. But, all we really care about now is thinking about the position, the displacement, and the distance. So, position is plotted. We don't need to think about position too much. This is a plot of the position. It's really a little displacement vectors past the origin position. Let's think about the displacement. To think about displacement, we need an initial time and a final time. We're going to say it was at t equals 0, and we'll call this t. Say it's five seconds. So, we have t initial equals 0. T final equals 5. We don't even really need the times, because all we really care about is the displacement, delta x equals what? X final, which was 0. 0 minus x initial, which was 10. We get 0 minus 10, negative 10. Since it's a vector, and I put a number, and I can't put a vector hat on a number. That would be kind of weird. I'm going to put my i hat. Just means along the x-axis. The displacement was negative 10. If I were to draw that displacement vector, it would like this. There it is. The displacement from initial to final is negative 10. All this other crazy stuff happened, but it doesn't matter. Displacement just cares about initial and final. But, what if we wanted the distance? The distance, which we usually label d to distinguish it from position and displacement, which is x, the distance is really just how far it went. There's really no simple mathematical formula to get distance that I'm going to tell you about. You just have to look and say, literally, how far did Hal feel like he went? So, he went from 10 to 40, so that was a distance of 40. Then, he turned around and went from 40-- I'm sorry, he went from 10 to 40. That's a distance of 30. All right, he went 30. Then, he turned around and went back to 0. He went another 40. He turned around and went the other way, but you don't make it negative. Distance doesn't care about positive or negative. It just cares about how far you went. He went 30 plus 40. He went 70. If we want to do units, they're both in centimeters. It's the same path, or it's the same trip. It's the same experiment, but you can see that the displacement was much smaller, small and negative. Whereas, the distance is always positive. It's just how far away. You can think about this in your everyday life as well. I turned on my exercise tracker and tracked myself coming here today, from my house to here. All right. Now, I'm showing you the map. So, there you can see my little path of all the distance I went. It's about three miles or so. But now, here, I'm also going to put on there the displacement vector. Now, you can see the displacement. Of course, that's shorter, because it doesn't have all the little turns and everything. But my car says, I went the distance. In physics, I would say my displacement. I would just draw the other vector. So there, you can kind of see the difference. This can be done, really, for any path that runs around different directions. And now, I'm a little concerned. My exercise tracker is telling me not to run so fast, because I'm going to have a heart attack. So, I should not have used my exercise tracker for that drive. But for physics education, I was willing to risk it. So, that's distances. Now, let's think about how we can use it to describe another kind of velocity.
