SPEAKER 1: So, it seems a little confusing. We have average velocity, instantaneous velocity, average speed. We have all these things just for the simple idea of motion. What I like to do is take them and sort of put them all on a chart. Let's do a chart and see what we come up with. We're actually going to discover there's a fourth one. I like to draw the chart kind of like this. Let me see. I'm going to draw something like this and something like this. I'm going to write velocity here, _velo, and I'm going to write speed here. And then, I'm going to write average here and instantaneous here. First, let's just remind ourselves what they are. The average velocity, that's what we called v avg, and it was the displacement over some time interval. We got that down. Then, we said, oh, let's let delta t be really small. And then, we said that was the instantaneous velocity, no subscript, but a vector symbol. That was dx, or position, of course, as a vector dt. We turn it into a derivative just making delta t small. Then, said there's this thing, the average speed. We put the avg, because it's average, but no vector symbol, because it's not a vector. It's just the distance traveled over delta t. You could look at these and say, OK, then what about the instantaneous speed? What does that really mean? Let's draw a couple of _xt plots here. So, here's time. Here is x. We got a ball that's moving. You could say, well, let's see. Instantaneous speed, what must that mean? It's like the slope, but it can't be a vector. It must be a v, my beautiful cursive _v's, no vector, but what's it equal to? It's kind of like the slope, but it doesn't care about the direction. It's clearly the slope. What if we thought about it going up, and we thought about it going down? What if we thought about a ball rolling both ways? So, this is rolling to the right in a Hal demo. This is rolling to the left in a Hal demo. The difference in v would be the sign. Here, v would be, say, let's just estimate that it was 3 meters per second. I'll put i hat, positive direction. And here, let's say the instantaneous velocity would be minus 3 meters per second i hat. But, what the speed would say is, it's just three, because speed doesn't care about the direction. All speed cares about is how fast it's going. So, speed would be similar. The instantaneous speed would also be the value right at a point, but it wouldn't care about the sign. The way we write that in physics is, we take the vector, and we just say take away all the magnitude. Put these two bars on it. And that's the magnitude of the speed. This is 3 meters per second, or minus 3 meters per second. When you put these on it, it's just three. It's how long the vector is, not which way the vector is pointing. So this really is the notation. We rarely really talk about the instantaneous speed. Well, we do, but we don't usually write it like this. A lot of times, we would just say v. Instantaneous, no vector. But formally, I want to write it like this. It's a vector, but it's just the magnitude of the vector. So, if you can have all these down, you'll be in good shape, because we'll use them all later. Now, to help think about them, let's think about their relationships. When can you say they're equal? Are any of them ever equal? Let's see if we can go this way and make them equal. When are they equal this way? Let's do a little wiggly arrow out here and say, when they're equal that way. When are they equal going down? They're equal going down for uniform motion, or when delta t is very small. If you have your average velocity over if things are moving uniformly, we talked about how your average velocity between this interval and your instantaneous velocity, at any time, is the same. Even if it's curved a little bit, if you look at a small enough interval, you're going to get the same average and instantaneous velocity. The same thing for speed. In that case, it's not really any difference. OK, so uniform motion, these are indistinguishable. If things are changing their speed, then it changes. What if we try to go this way? What if we were to say, are these equal? What is the answer for that? That's really a question what do you mean by equal, really, that's getting to this whole vector versus scalar question. Does it have a direction or not? Basically, here, you would say, yes, they are equal. That v is the magnitude of v. So, they're equal in that sense. They have the same magnitude. This one is kind of interesting. If you go on a path, delta t, will the average velocity and the average speed be the same? Well, they could be, but they don't have to be. The way we would write it mathematically would be like this. Let's think about it for a second. Say we have one of the crazy paths, t, x, and it does something like that. Remember that, where you have t initial and t final? The speed was bigger than the average velocity, because the speed considered the whole trip. The average velocity just considered the short, negative path displacement from here to here. The speed was bigger. The speed won't always be bigger. If you have a uniform motion, and you look between here and here, they'll be the same. The way you could say it is that, the average velocity, v average, will always be greater than or equal to the magnitude of the average velocity. I'm sorry, the average speed will always be greater than or equal to the magnitude of the average velocity. If it's a curvy path, the speed will be bigger, because it went farther in terms of distance. If it's a linear path, then they both went the same distance in displacement, and they'll be equal, so greater than or equal. This isn't super necessary to solve problems, but it does help you kind of get the big picture, in your head, of the differences of these things. At least, in my head. It may not help you at all.
