SPEAKER 1: We have two kinds of velocities Now, let's look at something called speed. Speed and velocity are used interchangeably in everyday language. They have a different meaning in physics. Average speed, it is really just the distance covered in some time interval delta t. So, like average velocity, it depends on an interval. But, it's not velocity. It's speed. To think about this one, let's do another example. Example four of Hal's motion. Example four is going to look like this. Hal is going to start somewhere. We're not going to do the numbers this time. He's going to start somewhere and roll, kind of slow, in the positive direction, and then really fast in the negative direction. Think about that motion for a minute. Slow positive for a long way, and then fast negative. Make a plot. Here we go, example four. Time x, slow positive like this for most of the time, and then sharp negative. And gets down to some position. There it is. So, let's look at that and think about maybe the average velocity. What would that be? For the entire trip-- what's the average velocity of the entire trip? We can call this ti. We can call this tf. What would the average velocity be? Well, it would be x final minus x initial over t final minus t initial. That's what it always is. But if you looked at it, we could do our little lines. There is x initial, and then here, that's supposed to be straight, is x final. You can see, he actually didn't get very far. I started him sort of here, and he went, and he came back faster, and I stopped him here. Even though he went all this path, he only got this far, in terms of displacement, in terms of a vector displacement forward, like that. What I conclude, from this, is that it's slow. I mean, we're not putting numbers to it, but you get the idea. He didn't get very far. Now, let's look at the speed. That's the average velocity. Let's look at the speed. V average. Yes, we use the same symbol, but I don't put a vector on it. Velocities are vector quantities. Speeds are not vector quantities. So the only difference I'm making is, I'm not putting the symbol, the vector symbol. You've got to remember. You'll see why it's not a vector is, because it's not a displacement vector. It's just d. It's just the total distance traveled over delta t. You know distance doesn't care about direction. It is how far did it actually go. Since it doesn't care about direction, can't be a vector. So, no vectors on the average speed side. To get that, we would have to break this up into a few parts. We would have to say, let's call this t1, and this important point here t2, and then here at the end, we'll call that t3. Then, we can start relabelling these. For speed, we'll call this x1, we'll call this x2, and really far out here, we got to x3. So then, we would say, OK. In this case, how do we get this distance? How far did it go? First, he went from x1 all the way to x3. X3 minus x1. And then, how far did he go? Then, he went all the way from x3 to x2. If we do final minus initial, x2 minus x3, we'll get a negative number. We want it to be positive, so I'll just do a little trick on you. I'll do x3 minus x2. Plus x3 minus x2. I should do the other one and put magnitude bars over it, but people freak out, so I don't want to. The point is, I did most of those numbers where they're nice, big, positive numbers. Big numbers. Over the t3 minus t1. So you can see, this will be faster. This will be fast and centimeters per second. Of course, they're all in centimeters per second. This will be faster, because the numerator is much bigger. If we were to apply this idea to 1, 2, and 3, the average velocity would just be this little distance. 3 minus-- oh no, that's a 2, and that's a 3. Hopefully, you noticed that, and you just smugly sat back and enjoyed my error. But I'll just keep going. That's a 3, that's a 2. So, really, it'd just be the small difference, 3 minus 2. That's why it's slow. Whereas, this one has all these parts in it. That's why it's big. Speeds often are faster than average velocities, because they don't have all the vectored part in them.
