SPEAKER 1: Here's an example of using the big kinematics equation. Let's look back at that thrown chalk. Before, we talked about, I threw down the chalk at 2 meters per second. How fast did it go after a half second? Now, the question is how far did it go in a half second? We could ask that question as well. Let's think about the experiment. Well, first I need to do it, but we're on a limited budget. Let me get a short piece of chalk here. So, we're going to throw it down at 2 meters per second. How far does it go in half a second? Always draw it, right? So, here's the chalk. We're going to throw it down, start at the origin. It's going to have an initial vi of 2 meters per second, initial velocity. Start at the origin and go down, and that's positive, because, in most of these lectures for the moment, positive x is down. Start at the origin. That's what we're describing. Really, you just describe that equation. Xf is xi plus vit plus 1/2 at squared. Let's just plug in and see what we get. The initial position is 0. I'm assuming I released it right at the origin. The initial velocity is 2 meters per second. The time we're talking about is a half second. So, 2 times 0.5 The initial velocity is going to make it go a meter. But, it's also accelerating down at 9.8, and then 0.5 seconds squared. So, you just plug in your numbers. This is about one. This is about an 1/8 of 10, which is about 1.25 You add these together, and sure enough, the exact number is 2.225 meters. The only tricky thing here is, you've got to think about all these signs. Here, everything was positive, because everything was down. What if we did the opposite? What if we throw it up at 2 meters per second? That sounds a little bad, but let's just go with it. We throw it up at 2 meters per second, meaning I'm so happy with the class! Look at that. It goes up. How would this be different? X final would be the same equation. Initial was still 0, 0 meters per second, plus but now, vi is negative, because I threw it up. Down is positive. So, it would be minus 2. Minus 2 times t is 0.5 And then, the acceleration is still down. Gravity is always down, so plus 1/2 9.8 0.5 squared. You put all that together, and I get 0.225 meters. So, different, because now, we threw it the other way. We have a question here about this plug and chug problem. Let's see. What are we concerned about here? And it looks like TrentonBoi, shouldn't the final position have been negative, you know, up? Let's see if we can figure out what TrentonBoi is talking about. Shouldn't the final position I think we did it right. I think, oh, yes, so Trenton, that's good. He's using his intuition. Boi, I'll assume it's a male. I think it's what boi means. Threw it up, was expecting the displacement to be up. And, that's a good guess. Actually, the way I threw it, after half a second, it probably still was up. And up would be a negative number. But, the way the numbers worked out, it actually turns out that the acceleration was strong enough that in half a second, it had turned it back down, and it was actually lower. You can actually tell, because this would have him pushing it up by a meter, but this is bringing it down by or 1.225 meters farther down. So, in the end, the acceleration tugged harder. Let me give you a more realistic look. There you go. After half a second, it had made it into the positive, the further down territory. So, we did. We did do it right.
