SPEAKER 1: So, we derived the position for constant acceleration kinematics, using calculus. And now, I'm going to show you how to do it just with graphs. Really, calculus is just graphs. But before I do, there's something I have to get off my chest. I've been teaching in this room for about seven years, and I've been staring at these. Hiding in a drawer under this bench are these two puppets. They've been haunting me for seven years. I do not know why they're here. I don't know what they're for. I'm imagining some sort of harassment seminar, I don't know. But, it really bothers me, so if anybody can fill me in on this. I'm just going to put them back and try to pretend they're not there. Now, here we go. Let's think, then, about these graphs. We're going to do the same problem, and actually, I'm going to throw it again, because I want to see acceleration with a constant initial velocity. I'm just going to do that again. OK. That's the problem we're looking at. So, it's the case of the chalk that started at the origin and went down, where down is the positive x direction. And, we gave it even an initial velocity. Right? So, to do this with graphs, we need to draw the graph. Let's draw the position versus time, x, the velocity versus time, v, and the acceleration versus time. We know it starts with an initial velocity, so I'll give it a little bit of a slope at the beginning, and then have it go up, like that. We know it starts with some offset, from here, because of that initial velocity. And then, that velocity continued to increase, due to acceleration. And, we know it had a constant acceleration, because everything near the surface of the Earth has a constant acceleration. We know we're asking ourselves how fast does it go after it gets to some time, t. So, we can say, to this point t. Ran out of room there. We're going to solve this graphically. But, there's one thing we've got to know, we got to remember. And, one thing is, we know that if we go this way, we're taking derivatives and slopes. But, when you have position versus time, and you want velocity versus time, what do you do? You take a derivative, or, if you like graphical analysis, you can say the slope. If you want to know the velocity from this thing, you take the slope of this curve, and it's equal to the velocity. The slope is increasing. That's why the velocity is increasing. Same thing, every time you go down, that happens. We can go down, from here to here, and again, you take the derivative, which is just the slope. All right. If you have the velocity time graphed, take a derivative to get the acceleration. Here, you can see it's a straight line. It's slope is constant. Acceleration is constant. You can go the other way, and this is getting a little more calculus - y. You can go and say, what is the change in velocity based on this graph? You can go this way. To go that way, you take an integral. An integral is any derivative. Going this way is derivative, going this way is the integral. Here, I'll say the change equals the integral. The change in v equals the integral of the a. Or, you can think of it as the area, the famous area, under the curve. You learned that, in calculus, that's kind of what an integral is. It's an area under a function. So, the change in v is the area under the acceleration curve, and the same thing happens here. It's really just math, so it has to be the same. Here, also, the change in delta x equals the integral of the velocity versus time curve, which is also just the area. OK. Let's see if we can use this to derive the kinematics equation. Sounds crazy, but let's just see what happens. Let's find delta x, from 0 to t. This is the interval we care about. Delta x, basically, x final minus x initial. That domain right there equals the area under this curve. This is a lopsided trapezoid. I don't know my geometry anymore. So, this is something, but I know what I can do is break it up into a rectangle here and a triangle there. I just need the area under those two curves, and it will be equal to delta x. Let's pick one. Let's do this one first. That one's easy. It's t, on this axis, and what is it here? That's vi, and where it started, at the height, v initial. So, the area of that box is vi times t. That's not so bad. Now, we need the triangle. What's the area of a triangle? It's one half base times height, plus one half. What is the base? The base is t. One half t. What is the height? The height is the change in v. The height is delta v, but what is delta v? Oh, we've got to do this again. The change is the integral. It's the area under the curve. That's delta v. What's that area? A times t. Delta x is x final minus x initial. Bring the x initial over plus vit, and this is plus one half a. Oh my god, look at that. It's the kinematics equation the whole time, straight from geometry. Pardon my lack of vector notation. I decided for this one, geometrical derivation, we didn't have to use vectors. But you can see, it worked, because it's the same thing. That's what slopes, and that's what integrals really are. Now, you won't always have simple, constant curves like this. We still need to do calculus for other kinds of problems. But for these, technically, this is all you need.
