SPEAKER 1: So far, we've spent a lot of time on definitions of distance, and displacement, and velocity, and average velocity, all these things. We haven't really talked about how to do kinematics, or about the standard equations that you're familiar with, or maybe that you've memorized before in kinematics. So now, we're going to show you the link between the definitions and the useful equations. We're only going to do it for, right now, constant velocity. You do kinematics under different assumptions. Right now, we're doing the kinematics, assuming that whatever's moving moves at a constant velocity. I wrote a quick problem here for us to use as we derive things. A football player starts on the 10 yard line, runs at 8 yards per second for 4 and a half seconds. Where does he, or she, end up? Which yard line? This is clearly American football. All right, so, even though we're doing this and going for the equations, it's still usually good to draw a graph. Why not? Let's remind ourselves what this would look like, more or less a kinematics plot. Of course, that's time on that axis. X, we can say, is the position, or progress, down the field. They started at the 10 yard line. We can start here at 10. That's in yards, and that's in seconds. And, we went at a uniform speed. So, it's like that. We know they stopped or, the part we care about is up to 4.5 seconds. This is the origin. Like that. That would be the point. Really, the question is, how far did they get? All right. One thing we want to realize, that helps the notation, if we realize, or remember, that at constant velocity so, if we're at constant velocity, that the average equals the instantaneous. Remember, average is the average velocity, if you consider two points in time. Instantaneous is if you consider an instant in time. But, as long as it's uniform and constant, it doesn't really matter. They're equal. That helps our notation, because then we can say that v, the vector for instantaneous velocity, equals the vector for average velocity, which equals the displacement over delta t. I want to use this for the velocity. I want to think about just the regular, old, instantaneous velocity, but I want to have this formula. But, this is for average. But actually, all three are equal, in this case. We can go from there. We can remind ourselves, let's see, what is v? V is just v, the velocity. What is this? This is the final position minus the initial position over delta t, like that. All right. I see we have a question. Let's see what the question is. It is from _Dank _Mimes. Why is position the vector? I thought displacement was the vector. OK, I know what you mean. Here it is. So, we define displacement as a vector, because it's from one place to another. It clearly has a direction. These are positions, but they have to be vectors, because this side is a vector. So really, even though we introduce displacement as the vector, position is also a vector. Position is displacement from the origin. Positions are also vectors. It's just, at the very beginning, we didn't describe them as vectors, just to not confuse you. But, positions are also vectors. Positions just also displacements from the origin. If the origin is here, and the first position is 10, there's the vector right there. That's the vector. Everything's a vector. Yes, it is unusual I'm writing all this in vector notation when it's a 1D problem, but that's just how I decided to do it. OK, so down here, also, delta t I should have written this time final minus time initial, so I could point out usually, time initial is just zero. We're going to put something at the origin, usually ti, initial time of 0. Then, usually, tf we just call t. We're usually going from time equals 0, to some time t. That's how we would usually write it. If we get rid of that, just call that t, and then start switching things around, we can solve for f, the final position. On this problem, it's the initial position. We're bringing this over here and bringing that over. It's the initial position plus that constant velocity times time. And that is one of the standard equations of kinematics that is the constant velocity kinematics. What is the position? You may know the street version of this, if you learned this in an earlier physics class. You may have just memorized d equals vt. It's really the same thing. You just don't have the vector notation on it, and d means _xf minus xi, how far you got. And to use it, it's just a straightforward plug it in. The final position is the initial position, which was 10 yard line, plus the speed, or the velocity in this case, 8 yards per second. T 4.5 All right, so 8 times 4.5, 32 plus 36. 36 plus 10 is 46. So, it's the 46 yard line where they ended up. Since it's a vector, I'll put i hat. We'll say i hat is the unit vector for down field. OK, so that's your first kinematics equation that you may want to know for constant velocity only.
