SPEAKER 1: Now, we need to find the change in position under constant acceleration. We did velocity. Now, let's do the more difficult case of position. It's going to take some calculus, so just bear with me. If you hate calculus, you could skip this lecture. I'd suggest you watch it. The next video, I'll do it completely graphical, and maybe you'll like that better, if you hate calculus. If you love calculus, this is it. Here we go. Get excited. Here we go. What we're going to do is, we're going to derive it for an object that's accelerating, constant acceleration. We're going to look between time 0 and time t. And, in that time, it goes from initial velocity to final velocity. We've kind of already done that. But, also, it goes from an initial position to a final position. So, at time t equals 0, it's at vi and xi. At time t equals t, it's at vf and xf. That's the plan. Let's start like this. It actually all starts with the instantaneous acceleration being the derivative of the instantaneous velocity. And then, we just rearrange this. We bring the dt over here, and we say dv, a little differential change in velocity, is just the acceleration times whatever differential change in time you do. That's just the differential version of v equals at. What we're going to do is integrate over the interval we're thinking about. Integrate from 0 to t. Integrate just means sum up. We're going to add up all these little delta t's, dt's, and multiply them by a to see what the new v is. You'd write that the math formalism will look like this. You'd integrate dv from vi to vf, and that would be equal to the integral of adt, from 0 to t. Your limits have to match whatever your differential is. The differential is v, so they're v's. Here, the differential is dt, so they are t's. So, if we integrate dv if you know how to do calculus, integral of dv is just v. V evaluated from vi to vf, vectors everywhere, that's equal to adt, the integral of a constant times dt is just the constant times t, so that's at, integrated from 0 to t. And then, what do we got to do? We've just got to apply the bounds, and you'd get vf minus vi. Plug in vf for v, that's vf, plug in vi for v, vi equals at. Plug in t, you get at. Minus plug in 0, you get nothing. This part is just at. And then, you see, that's basically what we just did. That's the final velocity is initial velocity plus at. That's the calculus version of that other board that we did. If we want to get to position, now we go to v, the instantaneous velocity, is the time derivative of the position dx dt. Same thing, turn it around, and say dx equals vdt. That's just d equals vt, really, the old equation you know and love. What we're going to do is integrate it. In this case, we're going to integrate dx from where? Xi to xf. And vdt, we're going to integrate from 0 to t, integral over t. Now, let's see. The left side is easy to integrate. The integral of dx is just x. And we evaluate it at xf minus xi. So, this just becomes the final position minus the initial position. Now, what about this integral? We just have a v there. Is it just vt? No. We just stick a t on there when there's a constant. This was a 1 times x. Here, a was a constant, so it just became at. But, v is not a constant. V is changing in time, and we know how it's changing in time over here. So, this is v at some time t. That's actually what this was. This is the v final is v initial plus at, where v final really could be at any time. V final was the velocity of time t. We can actually plug that little expression into here. It's the integral from 0 to t, and for that velocity expression, that's really a function, we write v initial plus at dt. That where it gets interesting, if that's interesting to you. I hope that it is. Now, we take the integral of that. So, we have the final position minus the initial position, also known as the displacement, equals integrate this part, now that is a constant. At this velocity, this initial velocity is not a function of time. It's a constant. The integral of that is just vi times t. And then, plus at. The integral of at is bring the t up to squared, divided by the 2, is one half at squared. Technically, we've got to evaluate that from 0 to t. It kind of already was, but just to give myself another step, I'll put final position minus initial position. Evaluate all this at t. Vit plus one half at squared minus, evaluate it all at 0, 0. There you have it. So, this is the final equation. We could move the xi over here to get sort of the most normal form. The final position is the initial position plus vit plus one half at squared. Possibly the most famous equation in all of simple 1D kinematics. But, it only applies if you have constant acceleration. To use it, you need to know if maybe you have some initial position and some initial velocity. Next, I'm going to show you another way to get this. And then, we'll look at how you can use it a little bit.
