SPEAKER 1: So, we have our definitions of instantaneous and average acceleration, and now, we know that things fall at a uniform constant acceleration of 9.8 meters per second squared, near the surface of the Earth. We're ready to do some kinematics. All right, so we're going to do kinematics with the assumption of constant acceleration. Before, it was constant velocity, now, constant acceleration. The problem we're going to work around now is that, I threw a piece of chalk down at two meters per second, in frustration. And then, how fast does the chalk go? This would look something like this. I had the chalk here, and the students all bomb the exam, so I'm like, ugh! Like that. How fast does the chalk go after a half second? Actually, I think at a half second, it had shattered. But, let's pretend that it kept going at a half second. The way we would do this is derive some kinematics from our definitions. It's going to be just like before. We're going to assume that if everything is constant, if the acceleration is constant, then the average value equals the instantaneous value. And that's going to write an equation very similar to velocity, as well. The instantaneous acceleration equals the average acceleration equals the change in velocity over the change in time. So, we want to think about this one being equal to that one, to get equations that look kind of like what we're used to. We're going to say a equals the final velocity minus the initial velocity over and remember, delta t was t final minus t initial. T initial is usually 0. T final, we just call it t. So, we can say over t. Right? Turn that around. Solve it for the final velocity. Say v final is v initial plus acceleration times time. That is yet another, important kinematics equation. This is how you figure out how fast something is going after it has accelerated for a while. I don't know. Maybe this one has a street name that v equals at, if you're being simple. That was just the velocity it got to, if you started at 0, without all the vector notation. So, you may have seen this one before. Let's solve our problem, then. It's pretty straightforward here. How fast did it get going? So vf is what we want. If I threw it down at 2 meters per second, before I released it, right when I released it, 2 meters per second was its initial. It's equal to 2 meters per second plus at. T A, we know, is 9.8 units, I guess, meters per second squared. I'm making it positive, because we're thinking of down as positive. If we thought of down as negative, I would have needed to put a negative sign here. But let's think of down as positive. And t is 0.5 seconds. So, we solve that, and we get a half of 9.8 We add 2 to it, and it's 6.9 meters per second down. It's a vector, because I put down, we'll say. So, pretty straightforward [? to pull ?] again. But, always remember, more importantly, that it is only for constant acceleration.
