SPEAKER 1: That's enough kinematics. Let's get back to our definitions. Our next concept to define is acceleration. The plain spoken definition is when something speeds up or slows down, although, I guess, technically, that's deceleration. But, usually, acceleration can mean either one. This is the simplest demo in the world. If you want to demonstrate acceleration, you just drop something. Here, I have my chalk. I let it go. Near the surface of the Earth, things accelerate as they fall down. If we want to, now, do our graphs and equations. First, let's do a quick drawing to remind us. Let's see. We had some chalk here. It was at the origin, and it went down. We'll call down plus x. In physics, we can switch things around. Up does not have to be positive. In this case, I'll write down as positive. There it goes. Let's plot it. We don't have the math, but for now, just trust me. It falls farther and farther, with a higher and higher slope. It's speeding up. If it's speeding up, that slope has to increase. It would look something like that. If I were to plot v, the velocity, versus time, what would it do? Let's see. At the beginning, when I released it, it had no velocity, and then, it would increase. The velocity increased as it fell. That's what it means to accelerate, in this case. If we were to plot the acceleration versus time, near the surface of the Earth, the acceleration was constant. That's a quick plot of, basically, what it would look like. The only error in this plot, I would say, is the slope should be coming to zero at the origin. Let me make that a little bit better. All right. So, that is the plot. Let's say, the object has acceleration, which, a more technical definition, is the rate of change of velocity with time. We denote it with an a. It is, of course, a vector, because it is the change of a vector. So, it also has to be a vector. It's in the _MKS unit is meters per second squared. Like that. That's it. Now, in terms of definitions, we do have the two different kinds of acceleration, just like we have the two different kinds of velocity. We have average acceleration. If you want to think about it over some interval, you can have the initial velocity at the beginning of the time interval and the final velocity at the end of the time interval. You can do this avg, just like with average velocity. Instead of the displacement here, we're going to have the final velocity minus the initial velocity. Here, we're going to have the final time minus the initial time. Quite equivalent to average velocity Or, you could write it like this. Delta v over delta t. You could call that the velocity displacement vector, but I wouldn't recommend it. That will probably just confuse you. Or, you could think about the instantaneous acceleration. And, just like with velocity, I will denote that by not putting a subscript. As you can imagine, with the same calculus and slope and derivative ideas, it's just dv dt. It is also true, since that's just dv dt, it is the slope of a vt curve. So, right here. The slope of this curve, the velocity versus time, you can see the slope is a constant. And sure enough, I drew the acceleration as a constant. So that's our basic definitions. Now, we can use them to do kinematics.
