Gen. 4:1 The man lay with his wife Eve, and she conceived and gave birth to
Cain. She said, ‘With the help of the Lord I have brought into being a male
child.’ 2 Afterwards she had another child, Abel. He tended the flock, and Cain
worked the land. 3 In due season Cain brought some of the fruits of the earth
as an offering to the Lord, 4 while Abel brought the choicest of the firstborn
of his flock. The Lord regarded Abel and his offering with favour, 5 but not
Cain and his offering. Cain was furious and he glowered. 6 The Lord said to
Cain, ‘Why are you angry? Why are you scowling? 7 If you do well, you hold your
head up; if not, sin is a demon crouching at the door; it will desire you, and
you will be mastered by it.’ 8 Cain said to his brother Abel, ‘Let us go out
into the country.’ Once there, Cain attacked and murdered his brother. 9 The
Lord asked Cain, ‘Where is your brother Abel?’ ‘I do not know,’ Cain answered.
‘Am I my brother’s keeper?’ 10 The Lord said, ‘What have you done? Your
brother’s blood is crying out to me from the ground. 11 Now you are accursed
and will be banished from the very ground which has opened its mouth to receive
the blood you have shed. 12 When you till the ground, it will no longer yield
you its produce. You shall be a wanderer, a fugitive on the earth.’ 13 Cain
said to the Lord, ‘My punishment is heavier than I can bear; 14 now you are
driving me off the land, and I must hide myself from your presence. I shall be a
wanderer, a fugitive on the earth, and I can be killed at sight by anyone.’ 15
The Lord answered him, ‘No: if anyone kills Cain, sevenfold vengeance will be
exacted from him.’ The Lord put a mark on Cain, so that anyone happening to meet
him should not kill him. 16 Cain went out from the Lord’s presence and settled
in the land of Nod to the east of Eden.
Gen. 4:17 Then Cain lay with his wife; and she conceived and gave birth to
Enoch. Cain was then building a town which he named Enoch after his son. 18
Enoch was the father of Irad, Irad of Mehujael, Mehujael of Methushael, and
Methushael of Lamech.
Gen. 4:19 Lamech married two women, one named Adah, the other Zillah. 20 Adah
gave birth to Jabal, the ancestor of tent-dwellers who raise flocks and herds.
21 His brother’s name was Jubal; he was the ancestor of those who play the harp
and pipe. 22 Zillah, the other wife, bore Tubal-cain, the master of all
coppersmiths and blacksmiths, and Tubal-cain’s sister was Naamah. 23 Lamech
said to his wives: ‘Adah and Zillah, listen to me; wives of Lamech, mark what I
say: I kill a man for wounding me, a young man for a blow. 24 If sevenfold
vengeance was to be exacted for Cain, for Lamech it would be seventy-sevenfold.’
25 Adam lay with his wife again. She gave birth to a son, and named him Seth,
‘for’, she said, ‘God has granted me another son in place of Abel, because Cain
killed him’. 26 Seth too had a son, whom he named Enosh. At that time people
began to invoke the Lord by name. 

