Gen. 5:1 This is the list of Adam’s descendants. On the day when God created
human beings he made them in his own likeness. 2 He created them male and
female, and on the day when he created them, he blessed them and called them
man.
Gen. 5:3 Adam was one hundred and thirty years old when he begot a son in his
likeness and image, and named him Seth. 4 After the birth of Seth he lived
eight hundred years, and had other sons and daughters. 5 He lived nine hundred
and thirty years, and then he died.
Gen. 5:6 Seth was one hundred and five years old when he begot Enosh. 7 After
the birth of Enosh he lived eight hundred and seven years, and had other sons
and daughters. 8 He lived nine hundred and twelve years, and then he died.
Gen. 5:9 Enosh was ninety years old when he begot Kenan. 10 After the birth
of Kenan he lived eight hundred and fifteen years, and had other sons and
daughters. 11 He lived nine hundred and five years, and then he died.
Gen. 5:12 Kenan was seventy years old when he begot Mahalalel. 13 After the
birth of Mahalalel he lived eight hundred and forty years, and had other sons
and daughters. 14 He lived nine hundred and ten years, and then he died.
Gen. 5:15 Mahalalel was sixty-five years old when he begot Jared. 16 After
the birth of Jared he lived eight hundred and thirty years, and had other sons
and daughters. 17 He lived eight hundred and ninety-five years, and then he
died.
Gen. 5:18 Jared was one hundred and sixty-two years old when he begot Enoch.
19 After the birth of Enoch he lived eight hundred years, and had other sons and
daughters. 20 He lived nine hundred and sixty-two years, and then he died.
Gen. 5:21 Enoch was sixty-five years old when he begot Methuselah. 22 After
the birth of Methuselah, Enoch walked with God for three hundred years, and had
other sons and daughters. 23 He lived three hundred and sixty-five years. 24
Enoch walked with God, and then was seen no more, because God had taken him
away.
Gen. 5:25 Methuselah was one hundred and eighty-seven years old when he begot
Lamech. 26 After the birth of Lamech he lived for seven hundred and eighty-two
years, and had other sons and daughters. 27 He lived nine hundred and sixtynine years, and then he died. 
Gen. 5:28 Lamech was one hundred and eighty-two years old when he begot a son.
29 He named him Noah, saying, ‘This boy will bring us relief from our work, from
the labour that has come upon us because of the Lord’s curse on the ground.’ 30
After the birth of Noah he lived for five hundred and ninety-five years, and had
other sons and daughters. 31 Lamech lived seven hundred and seventy-seven
years, and then he died. 32 Noah was five hundred years old when he begot Shem,
Ham, and Japheth. 

