Gen. 10:1 These are the descendants of Noah’s sons, Shem, Ham, and Japheth,
the sons born to them after the flood.
Gen. 10:2 The sons of Japheth: Gomer, Magog, Madai, Javan, Tubal, Meshech, and
Tiras. 3 The sons of Gomer: Ashkenaz, Riphath, and Togarmah. 4 The sons of
Javan: Elishah, Tarshish, Kittim, and Rodanim. 5 From these the peoples of the
coasts and islands separated into their own countries, each with their own
language, family by family, nation by nation.
Gen. 10:6 The sons of Ham: Cush, Mizraim, Put, and Canaan. 7 The sons of
Cush: Seba, Havilah, Sabtah, Raamah, and Sabtecha. The sons of Raamah: Sheba and
Dedan. 8 Cush was the father of Nimrod, who began to be known on earth for his
might. 9 He was outstanding as a mighty hunter—as the saying goes, ‘like
Nimrod, outstanding as a mighty hunter’. 10 At first his kingdom consisted of
Babel, Erech, and Accad, all of them in the land of Shinar. 11 From that land
he migrated to Assyria and built Nineveh, Rehoboth-ir, Calah, 12 and Resen, a
great city between Nineveh and Calah. 13 From Mizraim sprang the Ludim,
Anamites, Lehabites, Naphtuhites, 14 Pathrusites, Casluhites, and the
Caphtorites, from whom the Philistines were descended.
Gen. 10:15 Canaan was the father of Sidon, who was his eldest son, and Heth,
16 the Jebusites, the Amorites, the Girgashites, 17 the Hivites, the Arkites,
the Sinites, 18 the Arvadites, the Zemarites, and the Hamathites. Later the
Canaanites spread, 19 and then the Canaanite border ran from Sidon towards
Gerar all the way to Gaza; then all the way to Sodom and Gomorrah, Admah, and
Zeboyim as far as Lasha. 20 These were the sons of Ham, by families and
languages, with their countries and nations.
Gen. 10:21 Sons were born also to Shem, elder brother of Japheth, the ancestor
of all the sons of Eber. 22 The sons of Shem: Elam, Asshur, Arphaxad, Lud, and
Aram. 23 The sons of Aram: Uz, Hul, Gether, and Mash. 24 Arphaxad was the
father of Shelah, and Shelah the father of Eber. 25 Eber had two sons: one was 
named Peleg, because in his time the earth was divided; and his brother’s name
was Joktan. 26 Joktan was the father of Almodad, Sheleph, Hazarmoth, Jerah, 27
Hadoram, Uzal, Diklah, 28 Obal, Abimael, Sheba, 29 Ophir, Havilah, and Jobab.
All these were sons of Joktan. 30 They lived in the eastern hill-country, from
Mesha all the way to Sephar. 31 These were the sons of Shem, by families and
languages, with their countries and nations.
Gen. 10:32 These were the families of the sons of Noah according to their
genealogies, nation by nation; and from them came the separate nations on earth
after the flood. 

