Gen. 12:1 The Lord said to Abram, ‘Leave your own country, your kin, and your
father’s house, and go to a country that I will show you. 2 I shall make you
into a great nation; I shall bless you and make your name so great that it will
be used in blessings: 

3 those who bless you, I shall bless; those who curse
you, I shall curse. All the peoples on earth will wish to be blessed as you are
blessed.’ 4 Abram, who was seventy-five years old when he left Harran, set out
as the Lord had bidden him, and Lot went with him. 

5 He took his wife Sarai,
his brother’s son Lot, and all the possessions they had gathered and the
dependants they had acquired in Harran, and they departed for Canaan. When they
arrived there, 


6 Abram went on as far as the sanctuary at Shechem, the
terebinth tree of Moreh. (At that time the Canaanites lived in the land.) 7
When the Lord appeared to him and said, ‘I am giving this land to your
descendants,’ Abram built an altar there to the Lord who had appeared to him. 8
From there he moved on to the hill-country east of Bethel and pitched his tent
between Bethel on the west and Ai on the east. He built there an altar to the
Lord whom he invoked by name. 9 Thus Abram journeyed by stages towards the
Negeb.

Gen. 12:10 The land was stricken by a famine so severe that Abram went down to
Egypt to live there for a time. 

11 As he was about to enter Egypt, he said to
his wife Sarai, ‘I am well aware that you are a beautiful woman, and 12 I know
that when the Egyptians see you and think, “She is his wife,” they will let you
live but they will kill me. 13 Tell them you are my sister, so that all may go
well with me because of you, and my life be spared on your account.’
Gen. 

12:14 When Abram arrived in Egypt, the Egyptians saw that Sarai was
indeed very beautiful, 15 and Pharaoh’s courtiers, when they saw her, sang her
praises to Pharaoh. She was taken into Pharaoh’s household, 

16 and he treated
Abram well because of her, and Abram acquired sheep and cattle and donkeys, male
and female slaves, she-donkeys, and camels. 

17 But when the Lord inflicted
plagues on Pharaoh and his household on account of Abram’s wife Sarai, 18
Pharaoh summoned Abram. ‘Why have you treated me like this?’ he said. ‘Why did
you not tell me she was your wife? 19 Why did you say she was your sister, so
that I took her as a wife? Here she is: take her and go.’ 20 Pharaoh gave his
men orders, and they sent Abram on his way with his wife and all that belonged
to him. 
