Gen. 13:1 From Egypt Abram went up into the Negeb, he and his wife and all
that he possessed, and Lot went with him. 2 Abram had become very rich in
cattle and in silver and gold. 3 From the Negeb he journeyed by stages towards
Bethel, to the place between Bethel and Ai where he had earlier pitched his
tent, 4 and where he had previously set up an altar and invoked the Lord by
name. 5 Since Lot, who was travelling with Abram, also possessed sheep and
cattle and tents, 6 the land could not support them while they were together.
They had so much livestock that they could not settle in the same district, 7
and quarrels arose between Abram’s herdsmen and Lot’s. (The Canaanites and the
Perizzites were then living in the land.) 8 Abram said to Lot, ‘There must be
no quarrelling between us, or between my herdsmen and yours; for we are close
kinsmen. 9 The whole country is there in front of you. Let us part company: if
you go north, I shall go south; if you go south, I shall go north.’ 10 Lot
looked around and saw how well watered the whole plain of Jordan was; all the
way to Zoar it was like the Garden of the Lord, like the land of Egypt. This was
before the Lord had destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah. 11 So Lot chose all the
Jordan plain and took the road to the east. They parted company: 12 Abram
settled in Canaan, while Lot settled among the cities of the plain and pitched
his tent near Sodom. 13 Now the men of Sodom in their wickedness had committed
monstrous sins against the Lord. 
Gen. 13:14 After Lot and Abram had parted, the Lord said to Abram, ‘Look
around from where you are towards north, south, east, and west: 15 all the land
you see I shall give to you and to your descendants for ever. 16 I shall make
your descendants countless as the dust of the earth; only if the specks of dust 
on the ground could be counted could your descendants be counted. 17 Now go
through the length and breadth of the land, for I am giving it to you.’ 18
Abram moved his tent and settled by the terebinths of Mamre at Hebron, where he
built an altar to the Lord. 

