Chapter 1
Instead of Preface

What this book covers

This book covers the most important Vim concepts. Besides Vim, it also covers some of the best
learning strategies known to me (the author), and which are proven to work.
Having an understanding of how our brain works, and being aware of simple but effective
learning techniques, will help you to learn Vim (and any other topic) faster than ever before.
What you need for this book
You need to have a strong enough motivation and wish to learn Vim. That’s necessary. But it’s
not enough. Motivation is not the factor which will change your life. If someone is a fool and
becomes motivated, he merely becomes a motivated fool. That won’t lead to a positive change.
You’d have to be disciplined in going through the challenge of improving your Vim skills. This
way you’ll learn Vim quickly. But learning quickly is not equal to learning easily. You’ll have to
put in some serious work.
You might get stuck at some point. You might even think of giving up. You might think Vim is
too hard. I’ll tell you one thing: Don’t wish Vim was easier, wish you were better!
Who this book is for
This book is for everyone who’d like to learn Vim. Whether you’re a beginner and you’re starting
from scratch, or a more advanced user, I believe that you’ll find this book very useful.

Vim versions
All commands, shortcuts and examples in this book are tested using Vim 8. You’re free to use
different versions of Vim while learning (like gvim, macvim, neovim), but some shortcuts and
commands might behave differently than those presented in the book.
That’s why I recommend you simply use Vim 8 while learning from this book. Once you’re done
with it, you can think of moving to your preferred version of Vim.

Conventions
-----------
Before we start with the real stuff, pay attention to the typographical conventions that are used
in this book.
Key presses
Esc - Indicates that the named key (in this case key Esc) should be pressed.
Ctrl -p - Keys separated by - should be pressed simultaneously. In this example, Ctrl key should
be held down while the p key is pressed.

Normal mode commands
These are commands you type while you’re in Normal mode. For example, command to delete
four words is the command: d4w . The named characters should be entered in order.

Command line commands
You’ll learn more about commands later. Now just pay attention to the format of this commands.
Example of command line command (enable line numbers):
:set nu

This command enables line numbers.
All commands starting with : should be executed in Normal mode. If you’re in a different mode,
press Esc before you type a command. Within the Normal mode you can run Ex commands.
Normal mode is also known as command mode.


Fonts
A code block will be used to show code samples, multiple commands and some examples. Here’s
an example of presenting the read command and its shorter version:

:read
:r

A fixed width font is used for filenames, code, variable names and commands.
Other formatting
There are commands shown in this format: :ju[mps] . This means that you can execute this
command in two ways:
:jumps
:ju


As you can see, everything between [ and ] is optional.
Very often I’ll use bold characters in words explaining commands. For example: The command
to delete is d .
Bold characters in cases like this will indicate the command abbreviation, which should help
you remember Vim commands easier.
Commands are case sensitive. If you see g in command, that’s what you type. If you see G , it
means you type capital G.
If some commands should be typed in a system command line, they will be shown in a block
like this:
$ vim

This is how you start Vim from command line. Characters $ are used to indicate the command
line. You should type everything after that - in this case vim .

Piracy
Piracy of copyrighted material on the Internet is an ongoing problem. I do take the protection
of my copyright and licenses very seriously. If you come across any illegal copies of my works in
any form on the Internet, please email me at contact@jovicailic.org with a link to the suspected
pirated material.
I will greatly appreciate your help in protecting my work and ability to bring you more valuable
content.

Mastering Vim Quickly Newsletter
I recommend you subscribe to my weekly newsletter Mastering Vim Quickly Newsletter available at http://masteringvim.com.
Every week I’ll send you the best tips, tricks and news on Vim. Some of them will be from this
book, but also lots of them are not covered in the book. Simply, there’s too many things you
can learn about Vim. That’s why getting a tiny bit of knowledge once a week is a great way to
steadily improve your Vim skills.

Why this name
First time I saw an advanced Vim user working on his code, my impression was like “wtf just
happened”. He would edit his code in a way I’ve never seen before. Then, when I realized how
easy it is to do this, I thought “omg I have to try this!”.
That’s how I came up with Mastering Vim Quickly: From WTF to OMG in no time.
Questions
If you have a problem with any aspect of this book, feel free to contact me at any time. My
email is: contact@jovicailic.org. I’ll do my best to address the problem.


