Chapter 2
=========
Introduction
------------
There’s so much you want to do in life, and so little time. It’s the story of our modern lives. Now,
you want to learn Vim. Congratulations for making this decision! Now think, what’s holding
you back from getting started? It’s hard? It takes time? Effort?
Over the years, I have learned two uncomfortable truths related to learning. First: skills take
time and effort to master. And second: many things aren't fun until you’re good at them.
While learning any skill, there is a period of time in which you’re horribly unskilled, and you’re
painfully aware of that fact. The same applies when learning Vim. This book presents my
personal quest to quickly learn Vim, and as such, it will help you to acquire new Vim skills in
record time.
One of the beautiful things about learning any subject is the fact that you don't need to know
everything. What’s important is that you only need to understand a few critically important
concepts that provide most of the value. The same goes for Vim.
Mastering Vim Quickly is a set of foundational Vim concepts you can use to get things done.
Once you master the fundamentals, you can accomplish even the most challenging Vim magic
with surprising ease. And you will love it!
Over the past few years, I read several books on Vim, passed through hundreds of tutorials
and tips, used Vim from a few to over 10 hours a day and coded in more than a few different
programming languages. Along the way, I’ve collected, distilled and refined my findings into
the concepts and best tips which are presented in this book.
If you invest the time and energy necessary to learn these concepts, you’ll easily be in the top
5% of the human population when it comes to productivity in coding, programming and text
editing.
Think of this book as a filter. Instead of trying to absorb all of the Vim knowledge—and there’s
really a lot out there—use this book to help you with what matters most. This way you can focus
on what’s actually important: getting stuff done.

Bram Moolenaar, the creator of Vim, wrote:
“Learning to drive a car takes effort. Is that a reason to keep driving your bicycle?
No, you realize you need to invest time to learn a skill. Text editing isn't different.
You need to learn new commands and turn them into a habit.”
And I completely agree. This book will help you improve your Vim skills.

The art of learning
-------------------
I’m a learning addict. I usually read few books every month. This is good, because I learn a lot.
Then I try out what I learned, and adopt what works for me. In this short chapter, I will present
the three most important principles which work for me when it comes to learning.
Don't skip them. I believe it’s very important that each one of you has the same basic start
when it comes to learning techniques. I really want to help you learn Vim quickly. Therefore
pay attention to these principles. Once they are understood, you can use them for learning and
improving on any topic, not just Vim.

Pareto principle
Italian economist and sociologist Vilfredo Pareto (1848-1923) observed that 80% of the land in
Italy was owned by 20% of the population. While investigating other countries, he found the
same unequal distribution of income and wealth in each.
Pareto’s Principle basically states that roughly 20% of all our actions produce 80% of our results.
This means that 80% of effects come from 20% of causes. Because of these numbers, it’s also
called 80/20 principle.
We know that it doesn't have to be 80/20. It can also be 90/10, or 70/30. That’s not important
right now. What you must know is that the 80/20 principle works, regardless of whether you’re
conscious of it working or not. This is true for your business, personal life, and everything you
learn. Including Vim.
This means that, more or less, around 80% of what you’ve done today, has been pretty much
worthless to your bottom line. You probably know there are things you should be doing, that
you’re just not doing for whatever reason. Maybe you’re overweight or out of shape and you
know you should work out more. But, back to the topic.
Why am I telling you this at all, in a book about Vim? Well, I firmly believe that this principle is
true. I use it in almost every important area of my life, and it gives me very good results. I also
used this principle to quickly master Vim. This book provides you 20% of the most important
Vim fundamentals, which will help you to learn Vim really fast.

Mini habits
In order to learn Vim, you need to commit to it.
Think of the last time you made a commitment to learn something. Or to change something
in your life. It was easy to make a commitment, wasn't it? Maybe you even had a plan! Then,
fast forward a few weeks. Where’s that commitment? Gone, right? You’re not so motivated
anymore. Your willpower is close to zero.
I know this story very well. I’ve been there, and done that. I had to read a lot and try out what
works to find my way out. And I finally did! In the next couple of paragraphs, you’ll read the
summary. That’s all you need to know.
When you commit to something, the best way to reach your goal is to create a habit. In this
case, your goal would be mastering Vim quickly, and the habit you need to adopt is to regularly
learn.
The biggest barrier to forming new habits is usually the fact that it takes discipline to keep
doing something you don't really feel like doing. I found a workaround for this. It’s called the
mini habit. This is a game changer!
Here’s my own example: As I was working on this book, sometimes I struggled to start writing.
But once I start, I can easily write for longer periods of time. The problem is that, on some days,
I don't want to start writing. So I won’t. I’m pretty sure you’ve experienced something similar,
even with a different activity.

The key to forming a habit is the consistency. So I decided and promised myself that, no matter
what, I’ll stick to writing every day for the next month. Here’s what happened: for the first
couple of days I was motivated to stick to the plan. Then my motivation got lower (always does),
so I used my willpower to keep going.
However, after a week or so, I missed a day. And once I missed one day, it’s was pretty easy to
miss another. So my plan failed.
That’s the biggest problem with forming new habits. If you’re not consistent, you can’t create a
habit. So I finally understood the problem. When you feel resistance to something, you probably
won’t do it. If you don't feel like starting some activity (whether it’s writing, running or anything
else), motivation and willpower can’t really help for the long term.
With mini habits, you make a workaround for this resistance. And when there’s no resistance,
you just start and do what you should.
The workaround in my example looked like this: I’ve made a commitment to write just 50 words
a day. One paragraph or one Vim tip. That was my daily goal. It was very easy to achieve. I
didn't feel resistance to write only 50 words. Even if I was having a bad day, I was still able to
find a couple of minutes and write those 50 words! Anyone can do that. Actually, I realized that
it was easier to write those 50 words, than it is was to not write them.
Why? Because if you make a commitment, and if, no matter how good or bad you feel, you can’t 
force yourself to write the damn 50 words, then you’re basically saying to yourself that you’re a
big loser. Your pride won’t let you fail at something so ridiculously small. Especially if it takes
less than two minutes to complete.
This was a game changer for me.
You might think: “Yeah, but there’s nothing you can achieve with writing 50 words per day . . . ”
Well, that’s absolutely wrong. How so? You can try it. Sit down to write 50 words. Or trust me.
When I would start with writing (with the 50 written words goal in mind), I would usually write
far more than 50 words. Because once I would start, it was difficult to stop.
And this is the real power I want to share. No matter how you feel. No matter how busy you
are. It’s very hard to fail with such a tiny commitment. You can use this strategy for any other
activity as well, it really works great.
The whole trick for me was to make a commitment to write just 50 words every day. Your
commitment could be learning Vim quickly. That’s why you must always go in with the intention
to complete the smallest possible step. If you make it bigger, you will start to feel resistance.

1% improvement per day
You can’t master any skill in one day. You have to improve a little every single day. It compounds.
That’s how you should approach learning Vim as well.
Every day matters. You either increase your skill level for 1% or decrease it. It’s your choice.
In the beginning, there’s no real difference between making a choice that is 1% better or 1%
worse. It won’t impact you today. But, over time these small choices compound.
When 1% compounds every day, it doubles every 72 days. If you commit to improve your Vim
skills 1% every day, in one year your skills will be 38 times better!
How do you know how much is 1%? Well, when it’s about Vim, it’s hard to measure it. I would
suggest that you decide what your 1% is going to be. It can be reading one page of this book.
Or learning one new Vim feature, command or trick.
Another way is to dedicate a fixed time for learning Vim every day. Let’s say that you dedicate
20 minutes every day to learning Vim. During those 20 minutes, you’ll improve your Vim
skills—sometimes by 1%, sometimes by less or more. It’s not important to be that precise.
What’s most important here is consistency. Keep improving your skills every single day.

No Experience Necessary
Don't worry if you’re a complete beginner. I don't assume that you’re already good in Vim
(but this book will still be very useful if you are!). You’ll find the information in this book more
valuable and practical than anything you learned from other Vim resources.
Each chapter is packed with examples that support detailed explanations of all the important
concepts, and they are presented in a way that helps you avoid the confusion that I faced when
I was learning. With this book and plenty of practice, you will be amazed at how quickly you
can go from complete beginner to super productive pro.
Mastering Vim Quickly is for anyone who wants to learn Vim, but who possibly doesn't know
where to start, or has tried to learn but struggled to make progress, or is intimidated by how
difficult Vim appears to be. This book is designed to give you the head start I didn't have.
Wherever you are, if you want to learn Vim, this book will help you learn smarter. Start exploring
Vim today, and get to productivity fast!



