Chapter 5

Vim Concepts
------------
Vim is a different text editor from all the other editors. That’s why you need to understand
some Vim concepts, as you probably have never experienced concepts like these with different
text editors.

@!
Vim has 12 modes in total!!!
 - Normal (navigation and text manipulation).
 - Insert mode (for inserting new text)
 - Visual mode (for navigation and manipulation of text selections)
 - Insert Normal mode (in Insert mode, and press Ctrl -o, after execution of a command return to Insert mode)

Modes
-----
If you want to understand and learn Vim, you need to understand Vim modes. Vim has twelve
modes in total. However, in your daily use, you’ll need to use 4 or 5 of them regularly. It’s very
important to understand those.
Here are the most important ones:
Normal mode - When you start Vim, by default you’ll be in Normal mode. In this mode you can
enter all the normal editor commands. It’s mostly used for navigation and text manipulation.
Advanced Vim users spend most of their time in Normal mode. A good habit to adopt and keep
in mind: whenever you’re not typing, it’s better to get back to Normal mode.
Insert mode - As the name says, this is for inserting new text. In this mode you can also run
some of the commands. By default, “– INSERT –” is shown at the bottom of Vim window.
Command mode - In this mode you can run Ex commands (like :set number ), enter search
patterns (like /word ) and enter filter commands. After running the command, Vim returns to
Normal mode.

@!
:set number <---- Ex command
:{command}

/word <---------- Search pattern

"d4w" <------- editing command

@!
Ctrl-o single Command in Insert mode

Visual mode - For navigation and manipulation of text selections. It’s similar to Normal
mode, but the movement commands extend a highlighted area. When you use a non - movement
comman -d, it’s executed for the highlighted area. By default, there is “– VISUAL –” shown at the
bottom of the window.

Insert Normal mode - When you’re in Insert mode, and press Ctrl -o, you’ll enter this mode.
It’s similar to Vim Normal mode, but after executing one command, Vim returns to Insert mode.
By default, ‘– (insert) –’ is shown at the bottom of the window.

Commands
Commands are probably the most important concept in Vim. Most of what you’ll do within Vim
will be the result of executing different kinds of commands. In general, we can say that there
are three ways of executing commands in Vim:
Ex commands
This is any command you can run as :{command} , for example :help . You will use them often.
You can see the entire list of these commands (it’s very long, don't do it now) by running
:help ex-cmd-index .

Mapped commands
Any (more complex) commands, which we map or bind to some keys for easier access, belong
to this group. You’ll usually add these commands to your .vimrc file. You’ll learn more about
these in chapter Mappings.

Editing commands
These are the commands which you’ll usually use in Normal and Insert mode. These are
commands like d4w which will delete four words after your cursor. You’ll learn many of these
commands in chapter Do you speak Vim?.

