Life really too short to be unhappy at work.
Yet far too many of us aren't even close to being content - much less delighted -
with our work or our workplaces. Instead, we are stressed and exhausted.
We can't remember what we used to love about our jobs. Colleagues we trust and
respect are few and far between, and half the time it doesn't even feel safe to
be ourselves. All of this is spilling over into our personal lives.
We're having a hard time sleeping or have given up on exercise.
Relationships are suffering, too. We feel trapped and struggle to see how things
will get better.
No one wants to live like this. Still, a lot of us give up and settle for
less than fulfilling jobs. We tell ourselves that we're not supposed to be happy
at work; that's for other parts of life.
We try to cope by avoiding that bad manager or getting that stubborn, annoying
person off the team. We shut down, give less, and fantasize about telling someone
off.
Sometimes we run away from the job, the company, even our careers. But running
away isn't going to make things better. To be happy, I've discovered, you've got
to run toward something: meaningful work; a hopeful, inspiring vision of your
future; and good relationships with the people you work with every day.

What I found is both simple and profound: happiness matters at work as much as
it does in our personal lives. And when we are happy, we are more successful.
This flies in the face of the myth that  we don't have to be happy at work and
we shouldn't even expect to be. Luckily, though, we live in a time when organizations
and academia are taking happiness seriously. Leaders in major oil companies,
provincial, technology startup+es, and media corporation+es have often told me that
happy employees are more creative and committed. My studies of organizational
culture and leadership practices in South Africa, Cambodia, Italy, France, Germany, 
and the United States show the same thing: when we feel deep, abide+ing enjoyment
in what we do, we learn more, see more, and do more. I was encouraged to dig even
more deeply into my work and the wisdom shared by the many people I have had 
the privilege to work with over the years. I wanted to know what it takes to be
happy at work. My conclusion: to be truly happy at work, we need:
 - purpose;
 - hope;
 - friendships

We are wired to seek meaning in everything we do. It's what makes us human.
In some cases, it's what keeps us alive. In his classic book, Man's Search for
Meaning, Austrian shows that even in the worst of circumstance+es, purpose, hope,
and connection are what keep us going. True, his story of finding good
You need conviction to insist on living your purpose at work.
Having a sound, clear, and compelling purpose helps you be stronger, more
resilient, and able to tap into your knowledge and talents

Like meaning, hope is an essential part of our human experience.
Hope, optimism, and a vision of a future that is better than today help us rise
above trials and deal with setbacks.
Hope fuels energy, creativity, and resilience.
Hope makes it possible to navigate complexity, deal with pressure, prioritize,
and make sense of our crazy organizations and work lives. And hope inspire+es us
to reach our potential - something virtually everyone wants for themselves.
Unfortunately, we often assume that our organization+'s vision is enough to keep
as hopeful and focused on the future. I've rarely seen this to be the case.
An organization+'s vision, however inspiring, is for organization - not you.

To be truly happy at work, we need to see how our workplace responsibilities and
opportunity+es fit with a personal vision of our future. This kind of vision is
vital+ly tied to hope and optimism, which we can, with focus and hard work,
cultivate even in difficult jobs and toxic workplace. 
When we see our jobs through a positive lens, and when a personal vision is front
and center in our minds, we are more likely to learn from challenges and even
failures, rather than be destroyed by them. With hope, optimism, and a personal
vision, we can actively choose a path toward happiness - a path away from
disengagement, cynicism and despair.

Resonant relationships are at the heart of collective success in our companies.
That's because strong, trusting, authentic relationships 
