Technical English for Engineers
Prof. Aysha Iqbal
Department of Humanities and Social Science
Indian Institute of Technology, Madras
Lecture – 05
Reading (Identifying Main Ideas) and Listening
Good morning. So these are the topics for today Reading and Listening. All of us do a lot
of reading and listening in our day-to-day life. What we are going to look at in today’s
and subsequent lectures is how to pay attention to know answers of reading and listening
specially in classroom and academics setups.
Now, you know that what is reading comprehension; reading comprehension is the level
of understanding a text or a message. It involves two levels of processing that is shallow
level or that is also called low level and deep or rather higher level of processing
information. Now, deep level happens when we as readers, convert the meaning of the
words or the text and relate to similar text or words. We should be able to understand the
context. Shallow level, involves on the other hand understanding the structure of the
passage; somebody understands the structure we have been talking about the structure of
sentences, word pattern etcetera.
So, at this level, it goes without seeing that you are expected to learn or practice higher
or deeper level of reading. Reading different types of text requires the use of different
reading strategies and approaches. Now this is important to understand all of us have
certain strategies and certain approaches to understand a written text. Now it all depends
on us, what strategies we use and how we use. The best way to practice academic reading
is to understand the text and also develop the skill of speed reading, because after all in
academic context also at the level certain competitive exams, we do not have all the time
in the world to read and process the text. So, it is always useful to develop the skill of
speed reading, which comes with certain amount of practice.
Reading an active process can help the reader for better understanding of the text; and if
have to give you some tips about how to do a practices speed reading, you should know
certain terms here that is predicting, connecting, inferring, analyzing and critiquing the
text. So, it is always better to predict what comes next. So, prediction is also kind of askill that should be practiced and that should be developed. Connecting sentences
understanding the connection between sentences; inferring the meaning of sentence; all
these are important. At the same, we should be able to mentally process analyse critic or
critic rather what is happening here, and at the end be able to summarise, to sum up
whatever we have been reading.
A good reader practices these skills; it does not happen overnight; it is always advisable
to read higher order or advanced level of reading that, here I am not just talking about
reading higher order literature, but it is also advisable to read a good English newspaper
and or good scientific journals and magazines. For example, National Geographic and
Nature magazine as many of you would be interested in. It is always better to practice
your reading and develop your reading skills, and you will soon realize that reading such
kinds of magazines, journals and books, they also help in developing your vocabulary
especially your scientific vocabulary which you would be requiring in your academics as
well as in your profession and career.
Now, one of the key or one of the initial steps rather in practicing reading skills is to
identify the main idea, what is this passage or text all about. At the beginner's level, it is
always advisable to break a text into paragraph. So, here I would like to give you tip that
we as writers, we have not still moved onto developing written skills or writing skills,
but paragraphing is extremely important to understand or to be practitioner of good
writing. So, you have to be able to write good paragraphs. And while writing you have to
break your paragraphs into according to the main ideas, the central idea they contain. So,
each paragraph should have an idea. We will come to that later on, but let us understand
reading and how to identify its main idea, the main ideas in a passage.(Refer Slide Time: 06:58)
So, let us look at this particular passage, read on. Facebook, incorporated is a social
networking service and website. It aims to make the world more open and connected.
People use Facebook to stay connected with the friends and family, to discover what is
going on in the world around them, and to share and express what matters to them to the
people they care about. The company offers advertisers a unique combination of reach,
relevance, social context, and engagement to enhance the value of their ads.
Now what is being talked about here, what is the main idea? It tells you, what is
Facebook, it defines Facebook. At the beginning, you just look at the topics sentence;
topic sentence gives you the key to the passage. It Is a social networking service and
websites. And what does it do and then it goes on to give you a list of various things; it
connects people, it helps people in expressing what matter to them, what they care about
and then also it is unique platform to advertise goods.
So, what is Facebook and what does it do for people? So, there is a topic sentence which
tells you about, what is it about, what is it defines Facebook and then what does it do?
What does it aim to do? What are benefits of Facebook? It is not talking about
disadvantages; if at all it is there in this text, it will come at a later stage that you have
look at. I have given you the link and you can look it up, but one passage tells you these
things and that is the central idea and this is the way one needs to develop once writing,
and also reading. So, identify the main idea what is the passage all about. So, ask thequestion what. So, this is the tip that I want to give you to start practicing reading, what
is the passage ask the question, what is the passage all about.
(Refer Slide Time: 09:46)
Now look at this exercise and then we will go onto solve certain questions. Questions are
given at the end of this passage. So, rather lengthy passage, read it carefully. Do children
really need such long summer breaks, was a question posed by some experts recently.
Apparently, such a long break disrupts their development and comes in the way of their
learning process. Let us get them back to their books, is perhaps their expert view, if not
in so many words. One would have thought the children are doing too much during their
vacations and not too little, given the plethora of classes, camps and workshops
involving swimming, art, personality development, music, computers and like that seems
to cram their calendar. Even the trips taken in the name of holidays seem laden with
exotic destinations and customized experience packed into a short period of time. We can
do Europe in 10 days and Australia in a week and come back armed with digital
memories and overflowing suitcase. Holidays are in some ways, no longer a break but an
intensified search for experience not normally encountered in everyday life.(Refer Slide Time: 11:19)
It is far cry from summer holidays one experienced while growing up. For holidays every
year meant one thing and one thing alone - you went back to your native place, logged in
with the emotional headquarters of your extended family and spent two months with the
gaggle of uncles, aunts and first and second cousins. The happiest memories of the
childhood of a whole generation seem to be centered around this annual ritual of
homecoming and of affirmation. We tendered tacit apologies for the separateness
entailed in being individuals even as we scurried back into vacation was a time sticky
with oneness, as who were and what we owned oozed out from our individual selves into
a collective pot.
Summer was not really a break, but a joint. It was the bridge used to reaffirm one's
connectedness with one's larger community. One did not travel, one returned. It was not
an attempt to experience the new and the extraordinary but one that emphatically
underlined the power of the old and the ordinary. As time changes, what we seek from
our summer breaks too has changed in fundamental way. Today, we are attached much
more to the work and summer helps us temporarily detach from this new source of
identity. We refuel our individual selves now; and do so with much more material than
we did in the past. But for those who grew up in different times, summer was the best
time of their lives.(Refer Slide Time: 13:11)
Now, here are the questions, look at the questions and then go back the passage, it is a
very well written passage, and it has ideas in every paragraph. You can identify the main
ideas as well, but first let us look at the exercises. So, section one, Experts question the
summer breaks given to children because breaks. Students are kept busy during the
summer vacations. The writer's happiest memories of childhood were centered around,
and summer break in the present times are a way of. Look at these questions look, just do
the first section and come back.
Now let us look at the second section. Fill in the blanks using one word only and from
the passage given. The realization that children's summer breaks are dash with a plethora
of activities makes one conclude that they are doing dash. Holidays have now turned into
a dash for new experiences. These are far removed from the times when summer breaks
were a time of blank with the extended family. In the third section, find words or phrases
which mean the same as clearly seen or understood, excess both are or both can be
identified in paragraph one is and third definition or meaning is state as a fact or declare
formally second paragraph; and from the third paragraph, beyond what is usual. So, find
the words and phrases, which have the same meaning as the given expressions.
Let us discuss the answers now. So, what I was trying to do in the first section was to
identify and understand main parts of the passage. So, the answer to the first question is
that according to the experts and we have to complete the sentence. So, what happensduring vacations according to these experts? They disrupt children's development and
come in the way of learning process. And then the second statement is students are kept
busy during the summer vacations, they are engaged in a variety of courses, classes,
camps, workshops and in trips taken in the name of holidays. The third statement, the
writer's happiest memories of childhood were centered around the annual ritual of home
coming and affirmation; it is given there in the final paragraphs. And summer break in
the present times are away of detaching from work and refueling ourselves.
Section two, the realization that children’s summer breaks are tagged or crammed that is
the answer with a plethora of activities makes one conclude that they are doing much.
Holidays have now turned into a search for new experiences. These are far removed from
the times when summer breaks were a time of bonding with once family. Now let us look
at the third section find words and phrases, which mean the same. So, in first paragraph
clearly seen or understood is apparently; apparently it can be clearly seen and
understood. Excess, excess of everything that happens in summer vacation, so plethora;
and then is state as a fact the third one declares formally formation, and then beyond
what is usual beyond what is ordinary is extraordinary. So, this is I gave you this lengthy
passage, so that we come or we fall in the habit of reading lengthy passages and the deal
with ideas.
Now, let us move onto do little bit of vocabulary. In the passage that you have just read,
you must have come across word such as affirmation and temporarily, also emphatically,
normally now all these words what are they, these are affirmation is a noun and other
three are adverbs, so that is the part of speech. But how do we construct such words and
what are we now going to look at.(Refer Slide Time: 19:17)
So, affirmation and now I am going to give you the root word. So, what is the root word,
root word is a form here and -ation or -tion becomes your suffix. Suffixes are those
words a group of words that follow a root word and change class of the word. So, to
form if affirm to affirm is a verb then by adding t i o n or a t i o n you change the class
it becomes a noun. So, this is something that is very important to understand especially
in good writing and speaking. Now temporarily, again the root word is temporary, and
then you are adding i l y and changing the category; so from adjective, it big turns into an
adverb; same emphatic – emphatically, normal - normally. So, you are changing the class
of a word by using suffixes. There is another category called prefixes which also we are
going to see soon.(Refer Slide Time: 20:51)
Now look at this slide and note down some common forms of suffixes. The -ant type
words ending in -ant; -ant does that is or does something. The -ary or -ory type
connected with, the meaning is to connect with, sensory senses and disciplinary
connected with discipline. You have the -ate type, which is such as having the quality of
so bifurcate, explicate, promulgate. Then you have -crat that is a member of something
democrat, plutocrat, aristocrat. You have the -er type a person or thing. So, let us thing of
some examples using -er; a driver you know person or something who does something,
who does a job. So, -er from drive, you get driver.
(Refer Slide Time: 22:15)You have -ese type, it is generally used to suggest the nationality or country China-
Chinese, Japan-Japanese. You also have -ish type, again you can use it to suggest the
nationality Swede-Swedish, Dane-Danish. Now, another category -in or –an in which
such do suggest an activity in which many people take part, so sect-sectarian; then you
have the -ist form to suggest a person who practices something. You have the -ure and
-age, so -age again it changes the category of the word or the root words, so from post
you get postage; from parent you get parentage; from short you get short; we are short of
something, in short supply they shortage of something. So, it changes it gives you more
variety, more color to your language.
You also have the -ure type, for example, annex becomes annexure, expose becomes
exposure, so you are using the suffix -ure, architect-architecture. -Ment type, which is an
action or process doing something for example, abridgement, argument. So, all these you
also have the -ion type, discuss-discussion. So, those are some of the very few examples
of suffixes which are extremely important.
Now, let us do some listening. At the begging of this class today, session today I told you
that I will like you to practice some listening also. Here, I am going to read out a couple
of paragraphs. But before I do that, I am going to give you the questions. So, you will be
able to listen to the passage and then I will just take down the questions, and then listen
to me I am not going to show the slides here, I am going to read out the passage you have
to just look at these questions.(Refer Slide Time: 24:55)
So, please look at this slide with questions. Question 1 is what are the names of the 3
doctors? Second, how is the machine described as? Third, what did Mitty ask for? Fourth
question he pulled a dash, so there are two words dash, dash out of the machine and
inserted the pen in its place.
I am going to now read out the passage, and you start solving these or writing answers
for these questions. You will not be shown the passage this time; this is a test of listening
and not a test of reading. This passage is taken from a short story called The Secret Life
of Walter Mitty.
So, here it goes. In the operating room, there were whispered introductions, Dr.
Remington, Dr. Mitty, Dr. Pritchard Mitford. Dr. Mitty, I have read your book on
Streptothricosis said Pritchard Mitford shaking hands, a brilliant performance sir. Thank
you said Walter Mitty. Didn’t you know you were in the states Mitty, grumbled
Remington coals to new castle bringing Mitford and me up here for a tertiary; you are
very kind said Mitty. A huge complicated machine connected to the operating tables with
many tubes and wires began at this moment to go pocketa, pocketa, pocketa. The new
anesthetizer is giving away shouted an intern in turn. There is no one in the east who
knows how to fix it; quiet man said Mitty in a low cool voice. He sprang to the machine
which was now going pocketa, pocketa, queep, pocketa, queep. He began fingering
delicately a row of glistening dials.Give me a fountain pen, he pulled, he snapped someone handed him a fountain pen, he
pulled a faulty piston out of the machine and inserted the pen in its place; that will hold
for 10 minutes he said get on with the operation. A nurse hurried over and whispered to
Renshaw and Mitty saw the man turn pale.
Now, write the answers to the questions that I gave you at the beginning begging of the
passage. We will discuss the answers soon. So, first question what are the names of the 3
doctors, Dr. Remington, Dr. Mitty, Dr. Pritchard Mitford. Second question, how is the
machine described, a huge complicated machine. And what does Mitty asked for he,
asked for he says give me fountain pen, he asked for a fountain pen, and the two words
in the blank faulty piston. So, now, that we have been talking about machine especially
in the operating theater or operation theater.
Let us look at or I will give you example or names of certain instruments and I would
like you to take some time and write the definitions of these instruments. So, the first
word durometer, second machine ohmmeter - o h m m e t e r, third machine
sphygmomanometer; is sphygmomanometer - s p h y g m o m a n o m e t e r. Next is
planimeter - p l a n i m e t e r, and the last one is pycnometer - p y c n o m e t e r –
pycnometer. Now what are these machines for? So, durometer, it measures hardness of
materials. Ohmmeter measures electrical resistance. Sphygmomanometer is for
measuring blood pressure. Planimeter measures area, and pycnometer, it measures
density of a liquid.
Now in the story that you have just seen or heard a passage from, the hero Walter Mitty,
he imagines himself as various professionals, that is his imagination, that is his way
surviving his monotonous life. Now here is an exercise and I am giving you list
professionals and you have to tell me what to do these people work as or work for.(Refer Slide Time: 31:01)
So, first word cartographer; second word, seismologist; third word speleologist, next
word entomologist, next word antiquary, next word steeplejack, and you have to tell me
what do these people do, and the last word is paleontologist. What do these people do? A
cartographer makes maps, seismologist measures earthquakes, a speleologist studies
caves, and entomologist studies in insects and antiquary is a person who is an expert in
the relics of the past, steeplejack is an expert who repairs tall buildings, and a structures
and a paleontologist is someone who studies rocks.
I would like you to practice these speaking exercises and this is the question, I am giving
you a question and I want you to practice work in pairs, work with some friends and see
how you can develop. I will also give the link to develop this kind of abilities, where you
can get some information. So, it is important that you start talking and discussing topics
which would be of academic interest and use and value to you.(Refer Slide Time: 34:03)
So, the question is what do you know about free market environmentalism? Free market
environmentalism, and here is the link, please look at the slide given. This is a link; you
can get more details about this topic. Read it and then develop your own ideas. Before
we end up this class - today's class, I would like to wind up with idioms. Now what are
idioms and how we can use idiom in every day communication? So, what are idioms?
Idioms as you would know are expressions, which have a meaning that is not very
obvious from the individual words. For example, state of the art it is an expression very
commonly use it means something that is built upon latest technology. Why do we use
idioms? Why cannot we just use, our latest technology. We use idioms, because they add
color and variety to our language.
Now I am going to give you a list of idioms, you have a dictionary and I would like you
to practice and use these idioms in your day-to-day communication. It will also help you
in your various academic activities. So, this exercise is purely for self learning, hence
you have to do it yourself. The first idiom is to pin something down p i n pin, to pin
something down; next, to cost and arm and a leg, and arm and a leg; third, to beat around
the bush, to beat around the bush; fourth one devil’s advocate, devil’s advocate; next, to
sit on the fence, to sit on the fence; and the last expression, a phrase is Conspiracy
theory, Conspiracy theory.(Refer Slide Time: 36:25)
Look up these words in your dictionary; see how you can use in sentence of your own.
So, thank you very much and with this we end today’s class.
Tags
Reading English, English for Engineers, English words, English Exercise, Exercises in
English, Grammar usage, English Grammar, vocabulary, words and phrases, spoken
communication, written communication, English writing, English speaking, scientific
English, report writing, CV, formal letter, Speech-Preposition, Noun Phrases, Countable
and uncountable nouns, singular, plural
Essay writing, word categories, word formation, formal tone, paragraph writing, tone in
writing, speaking tone, signal words, Letter writing, understanding essays, Mechanics of
Essays, publishable essays, nouns, pronouns, verbs, adverbs, adjectives, propositions,
determiners, linking words, 'be' form, linking words, reading, listening
