Hello, welcome to
Computer Communications specialization. I'm Mr. _Xiaobo _Zhou, a professor in computer science at the
University of _Colorado, _Colorado Springs. I joined this beautiful and
vibrant university in 2003. Time flies, I have been teaching at
the university for almost 14 years, starting as an assistant professor,
later as associate professor, and now full professor. I also served as a Chair of the Department
of Computer Science from 2011 to 2016. Now I also serve as Interim Dean
of the College of Engineering and Applied Sciences. I teach broadly in computer science,
including computer networks and communication, operating systems,
distributor systems, computer architecture, and programming. I directed the Distributed, Sustainable
and Cloud Computing Lab called DISCO. My team aims to explore in depth
understanding of distributed, sustainable, and cloud computing and
augmented services. And develop innovative technologies
to enhance the system performance, dependability, scalability,
and the sustainability. The research was supported in part by
the National Science Foundation and Air Force Research Lab. I obtained an _NSF Career Award in 2009 and the University Faculty Award for
excellence research in 2011. Modern data centers hosting popular
Internet services and big data applications, face significant challenges
in performance and power control. The challenges are due to complex
interaction of highly dynamic and heterogeneous workloads in compressed
virtualized computing systems. Data center basic cloud services
often exhibit unpredictable performance variations due to
multitenant interference and the heterogeneity in dataset and hardware. Our research, designs and develops
systematic approach at a system and middleware levels to
reduce performance and variations of in-cloud applications
without compromising other objectives, such as a high data center utilization and
a good average of performance. Provide autonomic performance and
power control on virtualized cloud environments, and
enable big data processing frameworks. Such as _MapReduce _Hadoop and
Spark to fully exploit the benefits of flexible and
elastic resource allocations in the cloud, while addressing the overhead and
issues caused by server virtualization. Many accomplishments are attributed
at the dedication and talents from my graduate students. I have graduated 6 PhD students so far. After graduation, they joined
academia as tenure track faculty, or industry as engineer,
researcher, and a manager. I'm currently supervising
eight PhD students. I'm very actively involved in
professional communities related to distribute cloud computing, as well
as computer communications and networks. I serve as a General Co-Chair,
Program Co-Chair, Program Vice-Chair on several
major international conferences, including _CCGrid, _GLOBECOM, and _ICCCN. I also served as a technical program or many conference in
a fields such as _InfoCom. How I started was this. I obtained my degrees from university
an Ivy league school in China. My senior design project was to
implement a reliable upon _PSD circuit in a distributor
cluster of Unix stations. I still recall the challenges of
sequenceing on a Windows sliding. Follow watching or other workstations blocked by my
sender machine at a broadcasting. An excitements of accomplishing
the mechanism in a reliable and efficient way finally. This is the first time that I developed
a Coursera MOOC specialization and there is certainly room to
continue it's improvement but also seems to be hope that you
find this specialization useful.
