Welcome, today's lesson is on
the revolution of communication networks. A communication network in simplest
form is a set of equipment and facilities set to provide a service. Is a transfer of information between
users located at various locations. So ability of modern communication
networks to transfer communication at extremely high speeds. Allows user to do access information in
large volumes nearly instantaneously. So internet provides the communication
services that enables computers to provide valuable services such as web,
e-commerce, interactive games,
streaming, and far more. Three example networks show how services
influence the design of the network. They are telegraph network,
telephone network, and computer networks. Figure shows the improvement in
information transmission bit rate over the last 150 years. In this time, we have gone from
telegraph network operated at tenths of bits per second to modern optical
systems, operated at terabytes per second. In telegraph network a message
is transmitted across a network using signals. In 1837, Samuel Morris
demonstrated a practical telegraph that provided the basis for
digital telegraph service. Morse code converts text message
in sequence of data and dashes, and use transmission system
designed to convey dots and dashes. Later, electric telegraph
networks exploded. In these networks, a message or telegraph
would arrive at a telegraph station. And an operator would make a routing
decision based on the destination address. Store - and - Forward process was adopted. That is operator would
store the entire message until the desired communication
line became available. And then forward the message to
the next appropriate station. The process is described
as messenger switching. Now let's consider the Telegraph Network
from a service and architecture view point. THe network contains the following
key elements or functions. The foundation is a digital
transmission system that will convert text messages
in two symbols for communication. Framing is required for indicating
the beginning and end of messages, and the working a sequence of dots
dash into meaningful messages. Multiplexing is combining
the symbols from several operators onto the same communication line. A method of specifying
the destination address is needed. A routing procedure to time
the path that a message follows. One may note that there
are many similarities between the telephone networking and
today's package networking. In 1876, Bell invented the telephone. Basic telephone service
improved the two way real time transmission of voice
signals across a network. Signalling is required
to establish a call. Initial design which involved a direct
link line between any two users. And it was quickly recognized that
providing dedicated lines between each pair of users is very costly and
in a fitable space used it twice. Imagine a spider net. In 1878 telephone switch were introduced
to human operator to interconnector users and on demand. Later, the patch panel switch on
human operators were replaced by automated electromechanical switch. Sudden it performs switching
in automated manner. In this circuit switching only N
connection required to central office to interconnect N users. If a telephone connection involves
more than a single telephone office, several offices collaborated to
establish an end to end connection. Telephone switching office
is what interconnecting and organized in a hierarchical network,
with customers attaching to end office. Which in turn connected two tandem offices
on the force as shown in the figure. The connection from local office to its
customers is called as the last mile. Let's now consider the interplay
switching systems. We see the telephone that
works are connection - oriented because they require
the setting up of a connection before the actual transfer of
information can take place. The transfer mode of a networks
that involves setting up a dedicated end-to-end connection
is called circuit switching. Note that in circuit switching, the
routing decision is made when the path is set up in the switch and the transmission
equivalent across a network. A telephone numbering system is
used to identify users or stations. Hierarchical network structure simplifies
the routing and achieved scalability. History repeats itself. From telegraph networks we learned
message switching, store and forward, and
a connectionless communications. From telephone networks we
learned the circuit switching. And the connection
oriented at communication. Computer networks supports both packet
switching and virtual circuit switching.
