Today, we will learn Layered Architecture
and OSI reference model. OSI reference model was developed
as an open system architecture for the design of computer networks that
could communicate with each other. The model partitioned the communication
process into seven layers. From the bottom up, they are physical
layer, data link layer, network layer, transport layer, session layer,
presentation layer, and application layer. The seven layers are for
the communicating end systems. Note that the top four layers are for
end-to-end communications. For a network node,
it only has at lowest three layers. The network and data link layers involve interaction of
peer to peer process across a single hop. One may ask, why layering architectures? A layering architecture simplifies design,
implementation, and testing of networks by partitioning
oval communication process into parts. Protocol in each layer can be designed
separately from those in other layers. Protocol makes calls for
services from the layer below. Layering also provides flexibility for
modifying and evolving protocols and services
without having to change layers below. Next, we discuss major functions
of each layer from bottom up. Physical layer deals with the transmit
of bits of our communication channel. Such as uncoupled wire pairs. The layer is concerned now with
a particular choice of system parameters. It also is concerned with
the procedures to set up and release the connection as
well as mechanical aspects. The data link layer provides for the
transfer of block of information called the frames across our transmission
link that directly connects to nodes. It will insert framing information
into the sequence of transmitted bits to indicate the boundary of the frames. It is concerned with how
to group this into frames, how to detect big errors during
digital transmission, and how to calculate checked bits for
error detection. It inserts can show an address
information in the header, and the check bits in the trailer, to enable
recovery from transmission errors. Please note that our link includes the
case where multiple nodes are connected to a broadcast medium,
such as our local area network, LAN. Therefore, a media
access control procedure is required to coordinate
the access to the broadcast medium. Another key function is to do node
to node flow control which is avoid a buffer overflow
at the receiving node. Network layer provides for
the transfer of packets across a communication network or
multiple networks. One key aspect is that as addressing
must be scalable to accommodate a very large number of network users. Another key aspect in that
network codes jointly execute routing algorithms to determine
the routing paths across the network. By routing protocol we mean the procedure
to select paths across a network. This function makes network layer as
the most complex in the reference model. The network layer is also responsible for
congestion control to deal with temporary surges in packet
to traffic from time to time. When two hosts are connected
at two different networks, transfer of data must traverse two or more networks that are possibly differ in
their internal routing and address scheme. In the networking is a part of network
layer that provides transfer of package between gateway routers that
are connected to intermediate network, as shown in the figure. The example in the figure
illustrates a possible scenario that one host is connected to an ethernet LAN. My ATM network may
connect gateway routers. Transport layer is responsible for
the end to end transfer of messages from the process in a source machine to
a process In the destination machine. The layer accepts message from its
higher layer and prepares block of information called segments or data
grams for transfer between end machines. Transporting layer provides
different kind of services. One example, it may provide
service that it involves reliable, error-free transfer of sequence bites or
messages. And the other, it may provide
a connectionless service of quick, and simple one message transfer. The session layer and the presentation
layer were defined with different functions by inpractice that incorporated
with to the application layer. Application layer is to provide services
that are frequently required by applications that involve communication,
for example, HTTP protocol, domain name service, file transfer,
email and other applications. As a summary, the overall
communication process between two or more machines connected across one or
more networks is very complex. Layering partitions related communication
functions into groups that are manageable.
