I agreed that it could.

' But there's one even more powerful,' Andy went on in that musing way of his. ' I think it's at least possible that he convinced himself. It was the limelight. Reporters asking him questions, his picture in the papers ... all topped, of course, by his star turn in court. I'm not saying that he deliberately falsified his story, or perjured himself. I think it's possible that lie could have passed a lie detector test with flying colours, or sworn on his mother's sacred name that I bought those dishtowels. But still ... memory is such a goddam subjective thing.

' I know this much: even though my own lawyer thought I had to be lying about half my story, he never bought that business about the dishtowels. It's crazy on the face of it. I was pig-drunk, too drunk to have been thinking about muffling the gunshots. If I'd done it, I just would have let them rip.'

He went up to the turnout and parked there. He drank beer and smoked cigarettes. He watched the lights downstairs in Quentin's place go out. He watched a single light go on upstairs ... and fifteen minutes later he watched that one go out. He said he could guess the rest.

' Mr Dufresne, did you then go up to Glenn Quentin's house and kill the two of them?' his lawyer thundered.

' No, I did not,' Andy answered. By midnight, he said, he was sobering up. He was also feeling the first signs of a bad hangover. He decided to go home and sleep it off and think about the whole thing in a more adult fashion the next day. ' At that time, as I drove home, I was beginning to think that the wisest course would be to simply let her go to Reno and get her divorce.'

' Thank you, Mr Dufresne.'

The DA popped up.

' You divorced her in the quickest way you could think of, didn't you? You divorced her with a .38 revolver wrapped in dishtowels, didn't you?'

' No sir, I did not,' Andy said calmly.

' And then you shot her lover.'

' No, sir.'

' You mean you shot Quentin first?'

' I mean I didn't shoot either one of them. I drank two quarts of beer and smoked however many cigarettes that the police found at the turnout. Then I drove home and went to bed.'

' You told the jury that between 24 August and 10 September, you were feeling suicidal.'

' Yes, sir.'

' Suicidal enough to buy a revolver.'

' Yes.'

' Would it bother you overmuch, Mr Dufresne, if I told you that you do not seem to me to be the suicidal type?'

' No,' Andy said, ' but you don't impress me as being terribly sensitive, and I doubt very much that, if I were feeling suicidal, I would take my problem to you.'

There was a slight tense titter in the courtroom at this, but it won him no points with the jury.

' Did you take your .38 with you on the night of September?'

' No; as I've already testified -'

' Oh, yes!' The DA smiled sarcastically. ' You threw it into the river, didn't you? The Royal River. On the afternoon of 9 September.'

' Yes, sir.'

' One day before the murders.'

' Yes, sir.'

That's convenient, isn't it?'

‘It’s neither convenient nor inconvenient. Only the truth.'

‘I believe you heard Lieutenant Mincher's testimony?' Mincher had been in charge of the party which had dragged the stretch of the Royal near Pond Bridge, from which Andy had testified he had thrown the gun. The police had not found it ' Yes, sir. You know I heard it.'

Then you heard him testify that they found no gun, although they dragged for three days. That was rather convenient, too, wasn't it?'

' Convenience aside, it's a fact that they didn't find the gun,' Andy responded calmly. ' But I should like to point out to both you and the jury that the Pond Road Bridge is very close to where the Royal River empties into the Bay of Yarmouth. The current is strong. The gun may have been carried out into the bay itself.'

' And so no comparison can be made between the riflings on the bullets taken from the bloodstained corpses of your wife and Mr Glenn Quentin and the riflings on the barrel of your gun. That's correct, isn't it, Mr Dufresne?'

' Yes.'

That's also rather convenient, isn't it?'

At that, according to the papers, Andy displayed one of the few slight emotional reactions he allowed himself during the entire six-week period of the trial. A slight, bitter smile crossed his face.

' Since I am innocent of this crime, sir, and since I am telling the truth about throwing my gun into the river the day before the crime took place, then it seems to me decidedly inconvenient that the gun was never found.'

The DA hammered at him for two days. He re-read the Handy-Pik clerk's testimony about the dishtowels to Andy. Andy repeated that he could not recall buying them, but admitted that he also couldn't remember not buying them.

Was it true that Andy and Linda Dufresne had taken out a joint insurance policy in early 1947? Yes, that was true. And if acquitted, wasn't it true that Andy stood to gain $50,000 in benefits? True. And wasn't it true that he had gone up to Glenn Quentin's house with murder in his heart, and wasn't it also true that he had indeed committed murder twice over? No, it was not true. Then what did he think had happened, since there had been no signs of robbery?

' I have no way of knowing that, sir,' Andy said quietly.

The case went to the jury at one p.m. on a snowy Wednesday afternoon. The twelve jurymen and women came back at three-thirty. The bailiff said they would have been back earlier, but they had held off in order to enjoy a nice chicken dinner from Bentley's Restaurant at the county's expense. They found him guilty, and brother, if Maine had the death penalty, he would have done the airdance before that spring's crocuses poked their heads out of the dirt.


