Technical English for Engineers
Prof. Aysha Iqbal
Department of Humanities and Social Science
Indian Institute of Technology, Madras
Lecture - 02
Parts of Speech - Nouns
Hello, friends. So, we will start with talking about Word classes. So, words, what are
words? We will see, we will understand; but just like that. What do you understand by
the term word and what are word classes? Now, see every word that is used in our
writing, in our communication, in our speaking, the things we read, and the things we
listen to. They are all words and every word as a class. We will soon see what are word
classes.
Now see, the idea is that all of you are doing your various technical courses, engineering
courses. The idea is that you should be well versed with the categories of words before
you move on to more advance level of written and spoken English. So, that is what we
are here for. So, we start from the fundamentals. Now there are 8 kinds of or 8 different
kinds of words or parts of speech as we call them, and broadly speaking, I am very sure
you know these things; they are nouns, pronouns, verbs, adverbs, adjectives,
propositions, determiners and linking words. You get your 8 parts of speech. Each word,
every word that you hear or that you speak can be classified thus. So, it is very important
to understand especially in academic kind of English that, how we are using these words.(Refer Slide Time: 02:29)
Now, suppose I give you an example and you may take it down. Ram has an important
meeting at work tomorrow so he is quite busy. I will repeat, Ram has an important
meeting at work tomorrow, so he is quiet busy. Now where are the nouns? As you know,
the definition a working definition of a noun is, noun is a name of a person, place or
thing. So, Ram is a noun and Ram is a name and meeting also is a noun. Now, when I
say I am meeting, so and so today then this becomes a kind of verb. However, when we
say Ram is in a meeting today or I am in a meeting today it becomes a noun we have to
understand the categories. So, same word can be used as different kinds of parts of
speech. This is important to learn.
Now, Ram has an important meeting at work tomorrow; again remember that work is
also a noun. The reason is in this context is a noun. He is at work, but if you say, he
works hard, then is the main verb; again remember we do not say he works hardly that is
a wrong usage of English or wrong use of English. We do not say he works hardly,
hardly has a negative connotation. So, it was; he hardly worked, it means he did not work
at all. But when we mean someone works hard it means he is really very good worker,
hard worker; that is what we mean. He works hardly means; he does not work at all; that
is a the difference. Coming to the verbs in this sentence, again let us go back to the
sentence. Ram has an important meeting at work tomorrow so he is quite busy. Now 'is'and 'has' remember in the first part of the sentence 'has' is a verb in the second part of the
sentence 'is' is a verb.
(Refer Slide Time: 05:22)
We are going to see that, there is something called verb and the 'be' form, be. I will make
it better the 'be' form is falls under this particular form. So, the 'be' form 'is' is a kind of
verb has, have, had, these are verbs as well. Ram is the singular, therefore, has work. If
boys are hard at work or boys have lot of work to do, then it becomes have; has and
have, singular – plural. Now, an important meeting; 'an' is a determiner we will learn
more about it. Now, important meeting we have already seen; meeting is a noun and
important is something that adds to the meeting. What kind of a meeting? Not just casual
meeting, not just any meeting is an important meeting. So, any thing that adds or that
qualifies a noun becomes your adjective.
We learn more about that in detail in our subsequent classes. Now next word, at work
tomorrow; so 'at' is a next word and that is a proposition. Proposition is a category, many
people make lots of mistakes in this particular category but and in proposition; we have
to be little more careful about it. So, he has meeting at work; we do not say. So,
propositions are very specific kinds of words you cannot say meeting in work or meeting
to work you have to say meeting at work. Tomorrow, tomorrow and quite both are
adverbs, they add something to, they tell you the time that define, a kind of time or the
degree. So, quite busy, extremely busy degree extend to it therefore they become adverbs; very interesting category of verb. 'So' is a linking word, see it links the two
sections; Ram has an important meeting at work tomorrow so he is quite busy or rather
busy. So, rather also becomes your adverb. Remember, quite often, rather word
suggesting degrees they are adverbs. 'So' is a linking words which connects two sections,
two part of a sentence and he is rather busy, he is quit busy. Who is busy? Ram is busy.
So, we do not say Ram has an important meeting at work tomorrow. So, Ram is quite
busy instead of Ram we use the word he. It is called the category pronoun; it is a
referential word it refers to something that has already been said earlier.
I am writing on the board, the board is green, the board is big, the board belongs to this
recording studio; the board, the recording studio is at  madras. Now, this is not the
way, we use the link language. It may be correct, but it is not very effective. The board is
large and it is green and it is very big perhaps that is the way you can use it and we are
using the reference word; that is it. Rather than repeating the word board, which is the
noun again and again. So, remember these things. Now let us talk about how words are
used in sentences, some words could belong to different classes in different context.
For example, I work on my thesis for 6 hours every day and this work is really tiring.
Now where do you use the verb and where do you use the noun. I am talking about word
work. Let us say, I work hard, I work long hours you know any kind of any number of
permutations combinations. I work late you can use all these words here, qualifies here. I
work late, I work hard, I work long hours. Still the category of the word work this is
important; would not change, it remains a main verb. However, the work is tiring, the
work is boring, the work is demanding then it becomes your noun. So, work in the first
sentence is a verb while the word work in the next sentence in the next context is a noun.
So, we have to remember the categories and the context.
Sentences can also be without verbs. Now those are quite often used, but in a very
different kind of a situation or context. So, you as engineers or as people who are
pursuing technical degrees may not find much use for such kinds of sentences; however,
you should know. Now when do we use sentences without verbs, I will give you an
example; let us say he looks 50 years old full stop perhaps, older. Now he looks 50 years
old full stop looks is a verb here full stop perhaps older, is a; is a sentence by itself, but it has no verb in it. However, it depends on the first part of the sentence to or first sentence
to give a complete meaning to itself. Those are some context, some situation, some
circumstances when you can use sentences without a verb.
She has lost her mind full stop pretty that or alas. Now again, you are not using verb in
the second sentence, but it depends on its meaning on the first sentence, so those are the
instances where you can use a verb or you can have a sentence without a verb and these
second sentences achieve their punch because of the contrast they mark with the first
sentence used.
(Refer Slide Time: 14:21)
Now, I would like to draw your attention to this exercise, please read it. Here is a
paragraph that I have done for you. Identify class or the class of the underlined words. I
will read it for you. Aditya did not go to the cafe with the other students. Rani told him
they were going there, but he wanted to finish his work. Aditya is not very sociable. He
stays in his room and concentrates totally on his studies. I will repeat, Aditya did not go
to the cafe with the other students. Rani told him they were going there, but he wanted to
finish his work. Aditya is not very sociable. He stays in his room and concentrates totally
on his studies. The first example is done for you, 'to' is a the proposition and 'café' is a
noun, do the rest yourself. I will give you 2 minutes and then will get back, alright.(Refer Slide Time: 16:22)
Let us start solving the exercise and here the answers are given on this particular slide.
You already know 'to' is a proposition 'café' is a noun is a name of a place. 'The' is
determiner, 'told' is a verb, 'they' is a pronoun, it is stands for other students. 'There'
adverb suggesting the place, 'he' pronoun again referring to Aditya. You have finished as
verb here. Sociable, he is not a very sociable person is an adjective. It adds something to
Adithya's qualities he is not sociable, unsociable, unfriendly, very friendly so these are
adjectives. 'In' again is a proposition, 'and' is a linking word just like so in the previous
sentence and 'totally' suggest degrees and it is an adverb. So, I hope you got some
understanding of what we are tying to do here.(Refer Slide Time: 17:40)
Now, again I will draw your attention to the second exercise, again you have to read the
passage and answer the questions.
(Refer Slide Time: 17:48)
Read the passage very carefully I read it out for you. Change is often met with suspicion,
and the rapidly raging SMS culture is no exception. As the world and its children went
'mobile', the cell phone's most-loved features- Short Message Service (SMS) became the
handiest tool of communication.Beside convenient templates like 'I will be late', 'I am busy right now', and even 'I am
sorry' SMS is now to convey all minds of emotions, jokes, SOS alerts, news and
entertainment information. The language, which converted 'too' as in two double o to
'two', 'you are' to 'ur' and take care to 'tc', among the million other sms, may well
have begun to save space and cost. However, the conundrum of figuring out newly
coined short forms caught on with such fervor that despite the rapidly declining rates
offered by phone companies, the trend continues.
(Refer Slide Time: 19:03)
Students and young professionals often employ this 'half baked' language to almost all
aspects of their lives. "five out of 10 resumes I see are prepared with SMS languages",
reveals in an HR executive adding, “beside coming across as highly unprofessional,
these CVs are instantly rejected, even though the qualifications may be up to the mark."
SMS lingo has also invaded the usually meticulous examination system, with students of
all classes almost subconsciously using short forms in their answer papers. “We have
made it a policy to cut half a mark per short forms in class and unit tests. Children have
failed, but the trend continues,” laments an English teacher at a suburban school.(Refer Slide Time: 19:59)
Now, here is your exercise, please look at it and then I will go back or I will take you
back to the passage. Dash is a way of life and the dash and its children have adopted to
dash tool of adaptation which is referred to as dash. In fact, SMS language has become a
dash and parcel of their life which has also not spared the dash system which is supposed
be a meticulous system.
I will take you back to the; if you want you may take it down, note down this very short
passage and the exercises. You should complete the summary of the passage by filling
the appropriate words. Will go back to those earlier slides.
The change is a way of life and the world and its children have adopted, adopted what?
Is a rather lengthy word, right? Short Message Service, it has become the handiest tool of
communication. So, what are you going to write in c? Adapted the handiest tool of
adaptation which is referred to as Short Message Service that is your answer d you can
even use SMS for it. In fact, SMS language has become a pattern parcel.
A pattern parcel any way is an idiom, standard idiom which is also not spared the, what
system? The examination system, which is supposed be a meticulous system. So, this the
way you are so; you do an exercise where whatever words you have filled in change,
handiest, SMS, part, examination look up a dictionary and try to figure out what parts of speech these words are? This is important, because this is an online course and we are
here to help you, but I would strongly suggest that you do some part of this course you
know some part of learning yourself. So, it should be a blend of what we are doing here
online as well as self learning.
(Refer Slide Time: 24:18)
So, a good dictionary for this kind of an exercise and for many other things would be
Advanced English Learners Dictionary. This is an Oxford Dictionary, Oxford Dictionary
for Advance English Learners - So, this is one of the seminal dictionary you can
also use Cambridge Advance English Learners Dictionary. So, these are very standard
dictionaries and I would suggest that all of you have a copy of this, it would be a great
help it would come in extremely handy to use the word, which we have just seen in this
passage. So, we end today's class at this point and I will see you soon.
Thank you very much.
Tags
Reading English, English for Engineers, English words, English Exercise, Exercises in
English, Grammar usage, English Grammar, vocabulary, words and phrases, spoken communication, written communication, English writing, English speaking, scientific
English, report writing, CV, formal letter,
Essay writing, word categories, word formation, formal tone, paragraph writing, tone in
writing, speaking tone, signal words, Letter writing, understanding essays, Mechanics of
Essays, publishable essays, nouns, pronouns, verbs, adverbs, adjectives, propositions,
determiners, linking words, 'be' form, linking words
