Technical English For Engineers
Prof. Aysha Iqbal
Department of Humanities and Social Science
Indian Institute of Technology, Madras
Lecture – 03
Parts of Speech-Preposition & Noun Phrases
We have been talking about parts of speech and word classes etcetera. So, let us talk
about Prepositions. What are prepositions? Prepositions are those words that are placed
before a noun phrase or before an ‘ing’ clause to form a preposition phrase. Now, I have
return this on the board preposition, Preposition phrases and Noun phrases this is what
we will be doing for now. So, let me show you this slide, which contains some common
prepositions.
(Refer Slide Time: 01:16)
Let us look at it, and I will read out. This is a list of preposition some very commonly
used prepositions. Let us look at this; aboard, above, across, after, against, along, amid
and you may notice that amid is sometimes also used as amidst with and an extra –st,
that is more older form of English. Now a days we use this word as amid; but, by,
despite, down, except, during, for, since, through, till, to, before, behind, the list is not
terribly alphabetically arranged so mind that.(Refer Slide Time: 02:17)
Until, then we have beside and also besides; and you have to understand that difference
between the two beside and besides, where do we use beside and what are the place of
situations where we use besides, so it is different. Beyond, from, toward, in, and into,
inside, near, next, of, an o double off - completely different meanings; over, round, under,
with, so these are the commonly used prepositions, they are not all, but these are the
words that we very frequently used.(Refer Slide Time: 03:06)
Now, I am giving you an exercise and you should fill in the blanks with the correct form
of prepositions. Look at this passage and fill in the blanks with prepositions.
(Refer Slide Time: 03:21)I am mentioning the source here, from where the extract has been taken. Please look at it
and do your exercise. We will discuss the answer within once you complete the exercise.
So, let me give you, let us say 3 to 4 minutes.
(Refer Slide Time: 04:48)
So, let us discuss the answers now. One day an orthopedic surgeon and what have you
written here, the answer should be from Nizam Institute of Medical Sciences visited my
laboratory. He lifted the material and found it so light that he took me and what should
we write there what preposition to his hospital, and showed me his patients. There were
these little girls and boys with heavy metallic calipers weighing, what should be the
answer? Over 3 kgs each dragging their feet around. He said to me: Please remove the
pain of my patients. In three weeks, we made these Floor reaction Orthosis 300 gram
calipers and took them to the orthopedic center. The children did not believe their eyes.
From dragging around a 3 kg load on their legs, they could now move around. Their
parents had tears in their eyes. So, the correct prepositions.(Refer Slide Time: 06:28)
I am going to give you a couple of sentences, please look at these sentences and you
have to correct the mistakes in preposition. So, look at these sentences, I am going to
read out to you. The shop is right opposite to the bus stand. She returned back from
Hyderabad yesterday. He could not cope up with the workload. Despite of the rains, the
classes went on as per the schedule. The teacher discussed about the subject for a long
time. The book comprised of several chapters or comprises of several chapters. Now let
us discuss these, and what should be the correct form of prepositions here. The first
sentence the shop is right opposite the bus stand and ‘not opposite to’ we never use this. I
am setting opposite the teacher; I am standing opposite the studio, but I am standing right
opposite the building; we do not say opposite to the building, opposite to the studio,
opposite to the teacher, this is a common mistake.
Second sentence, she returned back from Hyderabad yesterday; correct form she returned
from Hyderabad yesterday, we do not use the form returned back that is incorrect, but
very commonly used. We just say she returned from Hyderabad. He returned my book; I
returned something that I have borrowed from my friend. So, we do not use it as returned
back. He could not cope up with the workload; he could not cope with the workload, we
do not cope up, but you cope.Despite of the rains, the classes went on as per the schedule; the correct form despite the
rains, we say in spite of, but despite. So, despite does not go with of; so despite the rains,
the classes went on as per the schedule. We are talking about mistakes, some common
mistakes that we make while using prepositions. The teacher that is our fifth sentence,
the teacher discussed about the subject for a long time. What should be the correct form,
the teacher discussed the subject for a long time. We do not say discussed about the
correct English is not - discussed about. And the last one the book comprises of several
chapters; we say the book comprises several chapters or we say the book consist of
several chapters, but not comprises of.
Let us now move on to another category and that is noun phrases. We already know what
is noun or what is the noun. Now noun phrase is the phrase that plays a role of a noun, I
will explain that to you. Now, the head noun in a noun phrase is often a noun or a
pronoun. Noun phrases are extremely common, and a noun with any sort of modifier
including just a number or an article is a noun phrase.
(Refer Slide Time: 10:32)
Let me give you an example such as I like working in the morning. In the morning
becomes noun phrase. I know the market place. So, the market place becomes the noun
phrase. I will also give you another example, I know the senior scientist. Let me write itdown here. I know the senior scientist; now the senior scientist here becomes the noun
phrase. Noun phrase is nothing but a phrase where the headword is the noun. So, you
look at these words the morning, the market place, the senior scientist, so these are the
noun phrases not just nouns.
(Refer Slide Time: 12:14)
Now, look at this slide and I would like you to correct the errors of noun phrases here.
He is a tall gentleman. The gentleman was wearing a new dress. She is my cousin sister.
My friend has fallen into bad companionship. You may put your sign here. Now you will
find certain noun phrases. I do not want you to give me the exact noun phrase here, but I
would like you to correct the errors, these are very common mistakes in using noun
phrases.
So, what do we say, he is a tall gentleman the correct form is he is a tall man. In day-to-
day English, we often use the word such as gentleman and lady, and female, very
loosely; at times rather at most times it is preferable just to use the form he is a tall man.
The gentleman was wearing a new dress. Now here we there is no problem of in the
expression or in the phrase the gentleman, it is absolutely fine, where is the problem, the
gentleman was wearing a new dress. Now very often we confuse dress with clothing, but
in correct English, we have to be very careful about using the word dress. Now dress issomething, which is associated with women, men do not wear dresses. So, you can
always say the gentleman was wearing a new uniform or a new shirt or a new suit, but
you do not say a man was wearing a new dress that completely changes its meaning.
Now she is my cousin sister very common use or usage rather this is not correct, this is
not appropriate this is we use or generally say she is my cousin. So, she is my cousin and
that is implicit that you are talking about a girl here, so she is my cousin; not cousin
sister, he is my cousin; not cousin brother. My friend has fallen into bad companionship;
my friend has fallen into bad company, not companionship. You may put your sign here
that two ways to correct this sentence, you may sign here or you may put your signature
here, but not sign you do not put your sign anywhere.
(Refer Slide Time: 15:43)
Now, we were talking about prepositions and now let us move on to talk about
prepositional phrases. A prepositional phrase consists of a preposition followed by a
prepositional complement. The complement is a noun phrase, but can also be another
element. So, there are some examples like let us meet at the canteen. So, here at the
canteen becomes your prepositional phrase. We were surprised at what happened, we
were surprised at what happened. So, at what happened becomes here prepositional
phrase. We may need the machine in the morning. So, in the morning becomes hereprepositional phrase. Rather even in the earlier sentence, I like working in the morning;
in the morning is more prepositional phrase and not a noun phrase. So, the morning can
be your phrase the noun phrase, but in the morning because of the presence of in, it
becomes your prepositional phrase. So, you can make that correction.
Now a prepositional phrase will function as an adjective or adverb. As an adjective, the
prepositional phrase answers the question which one. So, when we use a sentence in the
using a prepositional phrase. So, when you ask a question which, it should give you the
answer as prepositional phrase, when it is used as an adjective. Now let me direct your
attention to some another set of words which is these are all nouns. They can also be
used as noun phrases, but that is not what we are talking about here, I would like you to
find the plurals for the words given here. So, look at this slide.
(Refer Slide Time: 17:51)
Now this is your exercise, find the plurals for the following Passer by, Scissors, Sugar,
Salt, News, Technology, Knowledge; only these words and what could be or what should
be the plurals or plurals form of these words. So, Passer by – Passers by, we do not say
Passer by; likewise, mothers in law or sisters in law or daughters in law, not daughters in
laws, mother in laws, sister in laws, so Passers by. Scissor - Scissors rather and we say a
pair of scissors, a pair of trousers, so it cannot be anything else.Sugar and Salt, we cannot count the number of sugar or salt, so they remain just as they
are. So, we use another unit of measurement, so 1 kg of salt, 500 grams or half a kg of
salt or sugar. News, it is never newses plural of news remains news; again Technology
and Knowledge are used as such. So, we say he has lot of plenty of knowledge about
some subject matter, we do not say knowledges.
(Refer Slide Time: 19:43)
Here are some common mistakes; look at this slide. These furnitures should be replaced;
the correct form, these furniture should be replaced; we do not say furnitures. We have
no informations on this issue; the correct form, we have no information on this issue. She
has many luggages; you can say she has many pieces of luggage, but not luggages. He
read the newses, you already know that we have already talked about it; he read the
news. There are many beautiful sceneries in Ooty; there many beautiful scenery in Ooty;
we do not say sceneries. Now we are soon going to talk about another very important
part of a speech, which is an adjective.
What is an adjective? An adjective is something that adds something to a noun. We had
already talked about it; heavy luggage, beautiful scenery, new furniture, interesting news,
important information. So, beautiful, interesting, old, new, influential, irritating,
annoying, useful all these words are adjectives. What do they do? They do not makecomplete meaning by themselves, although they have their own meanings, but they are
not complete unless they are used with a noun or a pronoun. It is a useless program; it is
a worthless program, it is very provocative news. So, here useful, useless, worthless,
provocative these are all instances of adjectives. They add something to a noun or
pronoun, they add something to we learn something more about a noun or pronoun. We
learn more about adjective, but let us first fill in the blanks do this exercise that is fill in
the blanks with correct use of adjectives.
(Refer Slide Time: 22:17)
Look at it; look at this particular slide, take a minute or two, and then we will do this
exercise together. Alright, GAGAN and the full form is given developed jointly by the
Indian Space Research Organization and the AAI is more what should be the correct
adjective here. Now in the context, you always should look for the context of the
sentence and what word would you like to fill in here; even I could have given you a list
of adjectives, we will do an exercise like that also but I just thought this is a good warm
up exercise because this is a very recent news. So, is more the correct adjective should be
accurate when than any other global positioning system currently available, GAGAN is
better than any GPS as it ensures that at any given point in time the measures are
reliable.Standard GPS measurements can at times be off the mark by a dash value, you can a
great value by significant value anything would do, but GAGAN enabled signals can be
relied on all the time other space based navigation systems are GPS of the US, Glonass
of Russia, Galileo of Europe. GAGAN and the now look at the context of this sentence
Indian Regional Navigation Satellite System of India aim to enhance. Now what could
be the right form of adjective here, it could be the existing IRNSS of India aim to
enhance the capability of GPS to provide, accurate information or if it is not existing
then you can also say upcoming satellite system or you can even say forth coming. So,
what I am trying to do here is develop your vocabulary. So, there are certain words,
especially adjectives are those words, where you can have some kind of flexibility. You
cannot have flexibility where verbs and tense and articles are concerned, but with
adjectives you can have a little more flexibility try to develop your vocabulary.
At the other day, I was talking to you about a good dictionary and here is that dictionary
that I have been talked about Oxford Advanced Learners Dictionary, this is a very
standard book that all of you must possess. And many things that we are talking about
and we will be talking about in this course are something that you will find, and you can
always argument augment your knowledge and information give in this book. Let us
move on, let me give you some examples from this book. Now those of you who have
this dictionary, in section-47, and it is marked as R-47, there is a component on
adjectives. And the book talks about comparative and superlative forms of adjectives.
So, what do you understand by these words comparative and superlative adjective. See,
when you write your reports when you write your emails, particularly those that are
related to your assignments to your work, you are writing to your teacher, so this is the
kind of language you should be using. So, very often we find students making mistakes
by way of comparative and superlative adjectives, these are called degrees.
So, for example, the word is cold, comparative is colder, superlative is coldest. So, these
are the words that you should know, but we cannot be using the -er and -est, this is not a
hard and fast rule. For example, you have a word like pretty. So, you have prettier and
prettiest, but let us take a word like intelligent, now you do not have, you cannot apply
the same rule here -er and -est. So, what do we use for degrees? Now, for comparativedegree more intelligent; and if you have to single out one student from the class, most
intelligent, so these are the terms, these are the words that you should be able to use
when it comes to your conversation and your communication in day-to-day life. So, as
your self-learning practice, I would like you to look at section R-47 because naturally in
every topic cannot be covered in this course.
So, I would like you to do some self-learning; perhaps I would like to go back to this
topic once more. I will be doing some certain amount of adjectives with you soon, but
please be familiar with what are adjectives of degrees, comparative and superlative.
Thank you very much. We will be meeting soon for the next class.
Tags
Reading English, English for Engineers, English words, English Exercise, Exercises in
English, Grammar usage, English Grammar, vocabulary, words and phrases, spoken
communication, written communication, English writing, English speaking, scientific
English, report writing, CV, formal letter, Speech-Preposition, Noun Phrases
Essay writing, word categories, word formation, formal tone, paragraph writing, tone in
writing, speaking tone, signal words, Letter writing, understanding essays, Mechanics of
Essays, publishable essays, nouns, pronouns, verbs, adverbs, adjectives, propositions,
determiners, linking words, 'be' form, linking words
