Programming in C++
Prof. Partha Pratim Das
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture – 16
Operator Overloading (Contd.)
Welcome to module 9 of Programming in C++. We have been discussing operator
overloading. We have seen the similarity and differences between operators and
functions and we have seen how in C++, features have been given to define operator
functions and overload them, and with that we have taken two examples in the earlier
part to overload operator plus (operator +) for a string type that we have defined and
concatenate two strings and we have also overloaded operator plus in a different context
for an enum type to show how we can have a closed add operation for enum types.
(Refer Slide Time: 01:04)
Now, we will move forward to take a more detailed look into what can be overloaded
and how and what if you are defining your own type, any type then what are the
operators you can overload and how you can do that overload? What is the possible?
What is not possible? What is advisable and so on?So, I present here a summary of rules. Let us go through them very carefully. The first
naturally; if we have to overload your first question is - what is the operator that can
overload? Certainly, a number of operators are given in C++; plus, minus, division,
multiplication, assignments, various kinds of extensions of assignment, all of those exist.
So, can you define a new operator symbol and overload that? If that is a question if you
have then the answer is no; that is you have to restrict yourself only to the set of
operators that are defined in the system.
For example, you cannot say that I have a overloading; for say this operator or I will
have this operator. Actually, some of you had been the old programmers in Pascal, you
will recognize that this was the inequality in Pascal, but this is not a defined symbol in
C++. So, you cannot overload operators with new symbols.
The second point which is very important is, when you overload an operator; you cannot
change its intrinsic properties. Intrinsic properties will have to remain same and there are
3 intrinsic properties for an operator; that is arity, there is a number of operand it takes,
the precedence in with respect to other operators and associativity with respect to its own
group of operators or operators of the same precedence. These 3 intrinsic properties
cannot be changed.
(Refer Slide Time: 03:08)So, if you argue that, I do have an operator plus, which can be written like this or it can
be written like this. I have an operator minus which can be written like this, which can be
written like this and so on. So, which means here it is, arity is 2, here the arity is 1, but
just such kind of changes you will not be able to do yourself. If for the operator multiple
versions of arity exist and correspondingly different precedence and associativity are
defined, you will have to go by that, but you cannot; for any of the operators define or
change its arity precedence and associativity. So, intrinsic properties will have to be
totally honored.
The third are a list of; these are the commonly used 38 operators in C++ which can be
overloaded. So, you can see that you have almost all the operators that you can think of,
including the basic arithmetic operators and a whole lot of assignment operators, then
your shift operators, your logical operators, your pointer referencing operator, your array
operator, your function operator and so on. So, all this can be overloaded.
(Refer Slide Time: 04:43)
If you have a unary operator, as you know unary operators are of two types, one are
prefix operators which happen before the operand, that is this kind of; these are all prefix
operator or they can be of the post fix type.(Refer Slide Time: 04:47)
So, the question is a same operator particularly, if you look at ++, I can write ++a or I
can write a++. The question naturally is given the correspondence between an operator
and then operator function, we have said that the operator function corresponding to an
operator is just the operator keyword. So, it is operator keyword followed by the operator
symbol. So, both of these will necessarily have the same operator function name.
So, your question will be, but they are different operators, prefix and post fix are
different operator, pre-increment and post-increment are different behaviors. So, how do
we distinguish that? So, in these two points you will find that answer that if a unary
operator is prefix, then like this you simply write it, the signature will look something
like this, which takes one operand because it is unary of your type and it returns the
operand that it had taken after the incrementation.
Whereas, if it is post fix operator then the interesting thing is you will have to specify a
int as a second parameter and this int actually is not an active parameter. That is when
you actually invoke the operator there is no int that you are going to pass it is just there
in the signature. but this helps the compiler to decide that this operator this instance of
the operator function is for the post fix type and not of the prefix kind. So, if I write a++then it minds to this. If I write ++a, it minds to this. This is the basic mechanism of
resolving prefix and post unary operators for overloading.
Next, please note that there are some operators which are not allowed to be overloaded
like scope resolution operator, like member access, for example, if we have a structure,
we had seen complex structure with re and im as components. So, I can take the structure
name put a dot and put re. So, that is the re component of the structure. So, the member
access cannot be overloaded. The sizeof, to find the number of bytes of any variable or
type cannot be overloaded; the ternary operator cannot be overloaded and so on.
There are some operators which are allowed to be overloaded like logical AND, logical
OR, comma etc, but you have to keep in mind that if you overload them then their basic
properties, some additional properties might get destroyed.
(Refer Slide Time: 07:53)
That is in ampersand i.e. 'logical and' if I write this expression (a = = b && b = = c), then
this logical and has a behavior that if this part of the expression gets false then it does not
evaluate the second part. If this part of the expression gets false then it does not evaluate
the second part, do you see the correctness of the logic. If a is not equal to b; a and b are
different then a equal to b will become false and once this become false, since it is anAND operation no matter what that truth or falsity of b being equal to c whether the
second part is true or second part is false, this whole expression is going to be get false
anyway.
So, this kind of just evaluating one part and not evaluating the other is known as the
short circuit in evaluation, and is done by sequencing, because you need to decide in
which order you evaluate them. These are special behaviors of this operator. So, if you
overload those behaviors will get lost, you will have to be careful that after you overload
those behaviors cannot be assumed.
Finally, if you overload the pointer indirection operator then that operator must return
another pointer either it is a directly a pointer. This point just you note, it is not easy to
understand at this stage. We will at some point talk about particularly overloading of this
operator, which is a very strong feature of C++ programming not though of the language.
It is called smart pointers and that use it. So, if you are overloading this operator then
you need to necessarily return a pointer or something that can become again a pointer.
These are the basic rules of operator overloading. So, following this you can start writing
your operators and I have shown examples as in string and enum that, you really though
the rules have to be strictly followed, but they are quite intuitive and straight forward and
taking the examples that I have discussed here. You can simply write more and more
types of your own, it would be good to write a full complex type where you could
actually slowly overload other operators and really make the complex numbers behave as
in the integers once.(Refer Slide Time: 10:36)
In the following slides, which I will not go through in detail in the lectures, I have tried
to put down the operators which are not allowed to be overloaded as I had mentioned and
I have tried to provide a reasons so that you not only have; we just do not simply need to
remember is to why it is not allowed to overload the ternary operator or why is it not
allowed to overload the sizeof operator, you can actually understand the reason and then
it will be easier for you to remember.(Refer Slide Time: 11:12)
So, this one list which is overloading, where overloading is disallowed and another list
which I briefly discussed is where there are operators, where overloading is actually
allowed, but it is advised that you do not overload them because if you overload them
then some of the very basic behaviors of C++ program changes. So, these are to be
overloaded by really expert people and till you get to that level, I would advice that you
please do not overload that.
The remaining 38 operators that you have at hand, is rich enough to develop any kind of
algebra, with any kind of matrix, complex, fraction any kind of types that you want to.(Refer Slide Time: 11:56)
With this we come to the close of this module where, here we have introduced the
operator overloading and we have explained different rules and exceptions for operator
overloading.
And in the next module, in module 10, we will show another special case of extension
and special case of operator overloading in terms of dynamic memory management. We
will introduce the operators that C++ provide for dynamic memory management and we
will again show that how operator overloading can be applied in the context of dynamic
memory management operators to get, see various kinds of strong advantages in memory
management in C++.
