Lesson 1 - Human brain.
Passage 1. How does food affect you brain?
The foods you eat supply your body with energy. Your body needs energy to move,
breathe, and even to sleep.
One part of your body uses a surprising amount of energy. It's surprising
because this part of your body is small - only 2 to 3 percent of your total
weight - but it uses 20 to 30 percent of the energy from your food.
Can you guess what it is? It's your brain.
No doubt you know that drugs affect the brain, but did you know that food
affects it, too?
Different types of food affect the brain in different ways. Sometimes we can
feel the changes that food makes in our brains.
For example, most people can feel a change almost immediately after drinking
coffee. The caffeine in coffee makes people feel mentally sharper and more
awake. After a cup of coffee, a person can think and make decisions more
quickly.
Other foods affect the brain in ways that we cannot feel, so we aren't aware of
the affects. We do not realize how these foods influence us.
However, everything we eat matters. Our food affects how smart we are, how well
we remember things, and how long we can concentrate. For example, researchers
have found that:
 - eating breakfast makes students do better on tests.
 - spinach, berries, and other colorful fruits and vegetables help keep older
brains from slowing down.
 - eating large amounts of animal fat (in meat and cheese, for example) makes
learning more difficult.
 - fish really is brain food. Many people have long believed that eating fish
was good for the brain, and now scientists are finding that this is true.
For millions of years, the brains of early human beings stayed the same size.
They weighed only about one pound (400 to 500 grams).
Then, during the last million years or so, there was a big increase in brain
size, with the human brain growing to about three pounds on average. This
increase in brain size meant an increase in brainpower.
With bigger, more powerful, more advanced brains, human beings became smart
enough to build boats and invent written languages. They developed forms music
and began to create works of art.
Some scientists say that the big change in the size of the human brain happened
after started to eat fish and other kinds of seafood. Seafood contains a certain
kind of fat, known as omega 3 fat.
According to these scientists, omega 3 fat caused the increase in brain size.
Today, brain scientists in general agree: This fat is still important for
healthy brains, and most of us are not getting enough of it.
Did you realize that your brain is always changing, no matter how old you are?
The foods you eat affect how your brain grows, how well you learn, and how well
you remember things.
Maybe you have never thought about how you feed your brain. Luckily, it's never
too late to start feeding it well.

