Lesson 1 - Human brain.
======================
Passage 2. How does your memory works?
--------------------------------------
You have two basic types of memory: short term memory and long term memory.
Things you see or hear first enter your short term memory.
Very little of this information then passes on into your long term memory. Does
this mean have a bad memory? Not at all.
Your short term memory has a certain job to do. Its job is to store information
for a few seconds only. You use your short term memory when you look up a phone
number, call it, and then forget it.
You remember the number just long enough to use it, and then it disappears from
you memory. That's really a good thing. Imagine if your memory held every number,
face, and word ever knew! Your brain would hold a mountain of trivia.
Of course, we need to remember some information longer, so it has to pass from
short term to long term memory. Sometimes we tell ourselves to remember: OK,
don't forget: 555-1212, 555-1212...
But usually, we don't even think about it. Our brain makes the decision for us.
It decides to store the information or let it go.
The brain seems to make the decision by asking two questions:
 - Does the new information affect our emotions? Does it make us happy, sad,
angry, or excited?
 - Does the new information concern something we already know, so our brain can
store it with information that is already there?
And answer of yes to one or both of these questions sends the new information
into long term memory. That means the brain creates new connections among brain
cells.
These connections form in a region of the brain called the cerebral cortex. It's
the largest part of the brain.
After a piece of information enters your long term memory, how do you get it
back?
Sometimes your brain may seem like a deep, dark closet. You open the door to
look for something you are sure it's in there somewhere but you cannot find it.
Maybe the information is no longer there. Information disappears when
connections among brain cells become weak. They get weak if time passes and
the connections are not used.
That is why it's good to review your notes from a lecture soon after the class.
Do not wait too long to look in the closet.
To keep the memory of something strong, think of it often. For example, look at
those lecture notes the next day and the day after that, too.
Then wait a few days and review them again. Every time you think about
something, the connections in the brain get stronger. Then it's easier to
remember the information when you need it.
Unfortunately, this advice applies only to certain kinds of things that you try
to remember. It won't help when you ace trying to remember a name that's on the
tip of your tongue.
A tip of your tongue experience is the feeling that you're about to remember a
word but it just won't come out. These experiences are common among older adults,
but everyone has them. College students, on average, have one or two a week.
This advice also won't help you remember something that just never made it from
short term to long term memory.
No matter how hard you try, you won't find it in your memory. So you'll need
some other strategy to help you figure out where you left your keys.


