Lesson 1 - Human brain.
Passage 4. Research on Dreaming
_Bruno _Beckham has a good job. He also has a new job offer. He has to make
a decision right away, but he's not sure whether he should accept the offer.
He is sure, however, that he's not going to make up his mind tonight.
I'll know what to do in the morning. He says. How will he know?
What does he think will happen overnight? I don't know he says but whenever I
have a big decision to make, I have to sleep on it.
When you face a big decision, do your friends tell you to sleep on it? people
in Italy say _Dormici _su. It means the same thing. In France, they say, _La _nuit
_porte _conseil meaning "The night brings advice".
People in many cultures believe that something useful happens during sleep, but
what happens, and why?
Maybe the answer can be found in our dreams. Many people believe that dreams
help us in our daily lives.
The American boxer Floyd Patterson believed this. He used to dream of new ways
to move in a fight, and he claimed that these moves helped him surprise other
boxers.
_Srinivasa _Ramanujan, an important mathematician from India, said that all his
discoveries came to him in dreams.
Artist, scientists, and writers report getting ideas from dreams, too. The
English writer Mary Shelley did. She said that the story of Frankenstein came
to her in a dream.
McCartney of the Beatles woke up one morning from a dream in which he was
listening to music. He immediately went to the piano and played the music, which
became Yesterday one of the Beatles' most famous songs.
Scientists do not agree on what dreams mean or why people dream. Some doubt that
dreams have any important purpose. They say that dreams show activity in the
brain, but it's like the activity of a car going in circles with no driver. It
does nothing useful.
On the other hand, many scientists claim that dreams are helpful. They say that
dreams are good for learning new skills and developing strong memories.
Some researchers hope to learn more about the dreams of people by studying the
dreams of animals.
At the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), scientists have studied the
dreams of rats. In one study, the rats were learning to run through a maze, and
the scientists would record the activity in the rats' brains.
Later, during REM sleep, the rats' brains showed exactly the same activity.
The rats were going through the maze again in their dreams.
Researchers could tell if the dreaming rats were running or standing still.
In fact, one researcher reported that they could pinpoint where the rats would
be in the maze if they were awake.
Were the rats practicing for the next day? Does dreaming somehow help them learn
and remember? Do human brains work this way?
The researchers at MIT are searching for answers to these questions. Right now,
there is no explanation for dreams that everyone accepts. There is a great deal
we still do not know about the sleeping brain, but maybe one day we will know all
its secrets.

