Lesson 2 - Food.
Passage 1. Chocolate Maker.
Нow do you feel about chocolate? If you like it, you are far from alone. The
question is, why are so many people so crazy about it?
Jacques Torres has always loved chocolate. When he was a child in France, his
family could not afford to but it very often. They used to have chocolates only
once a year, at Christmas.
Jacques remembers how he used to take some and go hide under the table, with the
tablecloth all around him. He didn't want his mother to see how many chocolates
he was eating. He says that when he bit into one of his favorites, "That was
heaven!"
When he grew up, Jacques became a professional chef. For years, he worked at
famous restaurants in France and the United State. Then he left restaurant work
to start his own business.
Today, he owns nine chocolate shops in New York City, one with a chocolate
factory next door. It feels to him like a dream come true.
"Everybody loves chocolate," says Jacques, "but it's such a mystery to them.
How does this magic happen?"
At the factory, visitors get to watch how it happens through eleven foot tall
windows. Jacques offers visitors the chance to see how dusty brown cocoa beans
are turned into beautiful chocolates.
It's clear that many people share Jacques' love of chocolate. His shops sell
millions of dollars worth of chocolate each year. However, no one thinks of New
York City as the world capital of chocolate.
That would be Switzerland, a country rich in chocolate factories. The average
person there eats about 22 pounds of chocolate a year. Next in line after the
Swiss are the chocolate - loving British.
There are chocolate lovers across all of Europe, North and South America, and
Australia, too. Now chocolate makers are looking to Asia for new customers,
especially India and China.
Why do people love chocolate so much? Many researchers have asked this question,
and they have studied what chocolate does to the human brain.
Scientists have found that chocolate has more than 300 different chemicals in it.
Which ones give us the good feelings we get when chocolate melts in the mouth?
That has been difficult to figure out.

