Yamashita Electronics, Koichi Sato speaking.
Hello, Koichi, this is Bernard Klebermann. How are you?
Very well, thank you. How can I help?
We need some sales literature. We're planning big advertising campaign for your new laser printer, the HG903 model. And there's a lot of demand for your other products, too, by the way.
That's good. Could you hold on a second while I get a pen? ... OK. What do you need?
Could you send some more brochures - 5,000 would be good - plus some updated prices lists, the same amount? Also we need some point-of-sales literature.
Sorry, Bernard, I didn't catch that. Could you slow down a little, please? I need to take some notes.
Oh, sorry. Right - I said, we need more brochures.
Right, I've got that so far. Could you give me some more details?
Certainly. Um, 3,000 brochures for Switzerland, 1,000 for France and 500 each for Spain and Italy. Also I'd like some of those posters, pens and pencils with the company logo on - a couple of hundred - and 50 or so of the bags we give out for exhibitions.
Let me check that: 200 posters, pens and pencils and 50 bags. Got it.
Good. Another thing you might like to know, we've managed to get a big new customer, Seelmayer.
Seel- ... sorry, could you spell that for me, please, Bernard? I don't think I know the company.
Certainly, S-E-E-L-M-A-Y-E-R.
Thank you.
We're very excite about it. They're a big restaurant chain. They've placed an order for 518 of the new lasers. Please tell your boss, Hideo ...
Sorry, did you say 580 lasers?
No, 518 -  line one eight.
Right, I'll let my boss know. He'll probably want to write to this company to thank them.
Yes, please tell him to write to them, it'd be good PR. They're expanding very fast in Europe and they'll probably order some computers as well. They're planning a big roll-out here in the next few years. Tell him that.
Sorry, I don't follow you. What does roll-out mean?
A roll-out is when a company plans to expand throughout a country. It's a nationwide expansion, if you like.
Ah, I see. I'll tell my boss immediately. But I need details about the company ... Sorry, it's a bad line. Could you speak up, please? I can't hear you very well.
Yes, the line is awful. What did you say?
Could you e-mail me the details - the address, the right person to contact, etc.?
Sorry, I still can't hear you. I'll call you back, may be the line will be better.

