How do you advise companies to cope with modern communication?
I think the thing to remember is the principles of communication haven't
changed and I don't think there's anything inherent in technology that
makes good communication easier. It can make it better, but there are
also many ways it can make it worse. So, I think there's four things that
you need to remember. The first thing is that you've got to remember
people have limited attention - if you like, limited bandwidth - which
puts the onus on you as the communicator to think hard about what it is
exactly you're trying to communicate and make sure that you get it down
as succinctly as possible.
Um, second point is, recognise that, you know, communication is about
meaning. It's not about dumping vast amounts of data on people and
expecting them to deal with something. Now, I went to a presentation
once and someone started. He said, well, I've got 41 slides here, but 1
think I'll get through them all in 30 minutes. And they were really dense
slides - lots and lots of graphs and pictures. Now, I was actually at the
back of the room, and these glasses are not quite what they should be. I
need new lenses. I couldn't read any of the slides because they were so
fine, so that's what you've got to remember: don't dump lots of data on
people. You have to distil the meaning into, into a small number of points.
Um, the third point about communication is, it's just as much about
listening as it is about telling things, and the biggest communication
problems I come across in organisations are actually failures of listening
rather than failures of, of outward communication, particularly the
inability or unwillingness of senior management to listen to what other
people are actually telling them.
And the fourth point is that, um, you know, if a communication
is going to be effective - if you are actually going to get someone to do
something or stop doing something or do something differently - there's
got to be some sort of emotional connection in it.
And so, if you think about all those four points, there's no obvious reason
why technology would make any of those easier. There are certainly ways
you can use it to make it easier; there are certainly ways you can use it to
make it an awful lot worse. So, I think that's what you've got to watch. The
principles remain the same. The tools could help or could hinder.

