-1-

IT WAS the year 1241, when the Spirit of Spring had spread
her magic mantle of fresh verdure over the hills and broad—
backed, gently sloping mountain ranges of the Tukholian region
in the Carpathian section of ancient Rus (Ukraine).*

One glorious day of this spring the woodland slopes of Mt.
Zelemenya echoed with shouts and bellowing blasts of the
huntsmen’s horns.

Tuhar Wolf (Wowk), the new boyar of Tukhlia, had
organized a big game hunt to celebrate the beginning of his
rule in the region for just recently king Danilo of the principality of Halich had granted him full tenure over this section
of luxuriantly grassy downs and mountain woodlands.

As soon as he had chosen a site and built himself a house,
he arranged a hunting expedition as a way of self-introduction
to the boyars of surrounding communities.

*Ancient Greek writers called the land “Rhos” and later Latin
writers, “Rutheni”. In Ukrainian documents of old, the land is called
,“Rus” (pron. Roosh), this being the name of the dynasty as for instance the name Hapsburg or ‘Hohenzollern.

Ukraine possessed the name Rus before the 10th century while the
Muscovite or, as it is called today, the Russian nation did not have
its beginning until the middle of the 13th century. The name Russia
and the term Russian did not come into existence until the second half
of the 18th century when the Muscovite government, in order to get
its people to accept the name of another land, Rus, as their own, added
on the the “sia”, thus creating a new name.

Ethnographically the plains of Rus or Ukraine once stretched
in a wide belt of about 600 miles along the Black Sea and the Sea
of Azov, from the lower Danube and the Carpathian Range in the
West, naming the rivers Don and Volga and reaching to the Ural
mountains in the East.

** Boyar: A member of an aristocratic order, next below that of
the ruling princes; one of a privileged class.

-2-

In those days to undertake a hunt for big game was not
just a means of pleasantly passing away the time but a grim
and bloody risk, hazardous to life and limb. Bison, bears and
wild boars are truculent, malignant brutes. Seldom did anyone ever succeed in killing one of them with a bow and arrow.

Even deer were not bagged without a struggle. The actual
kill most often had to be made by facing the animal and
plunging a spear into its heart with all one’s might. 

If the spear missed its mark, the life of the hunter became greatly
endangered, especially if he was unable at the crucial moment
to find momentary refuge from which to launch a renewed
attack with a hunting knife or a strong, long-handled battle—
axe.

Therefore it was not surprising to ﬁnd that Tuhar and his
company prepared for the hunt as if for a siege ofiwar, with
a supply of ammunition, bows and arrows, a coterie of servants,
provisions of food and even a reputable sorcerer who knew how
to heal wounds.

Nor was there anything unusual in that Tuhar and his
guests were themselves as fully armed as warriors except for
steel helmets and armor which would have been too burden—
some to manage on their trek through the jungle growth and
over fallen timber of the mountainside. The only remarkable
aspect of this expedition was the presence of Tuhar’s daughter,
Peace—Renown (Meroslava), who not forsaking her father
even in this adventure, ventured to join his company of hunters.

The Tukholian citizens, seeing her riding boldly and
proudly among her father’s guests, like a straight young willow
tree among the oaks, followed her mounted form with approv-
ing eyes and spoke thus to one another: “What a girl! She’d
make a ﬁne young soldier, and probably a better man than her
father!”

This was no mean compliment for Tuhar Wolf was a man
as physically solid and strong as a giant oak, broad of shoulders,

-3-

brawny, and with a thick growth of black beard and hair so
that he might well himself have been mistaken for one of the
hairy Tukholian bears which he was bound to hunt down.
But such a daughter as his Peace—Renown was also hard to
ﬁnd. Aside from her high rank of birth, her beauty, her love-
able, kindly disposition, which a number of her contemporaries
could no doubt be found to possess in equal degree (though
not many could surpass her at that) there was one respect in
which none would ever rival her and that was in her free-
spirited nature, her initiative, the high degree of muscular de-
velopment and dauntless courage, manifest only in those young
men brought up under the direst stress of circumstances requiring from them an unremitting struggle with relentless nature.

It was apparent that from the outset, Peace-Renown had
been permitted the greatest personal freedom, that her up-
bringing had been masculine in nature and that within the
pleasingly formed feminine body dwelt a forceful and valiant
spirit.

She was Tuhar’s only child, her mother having died at her
birth. Her nurse, an old peasant woman, had trained her from
earliest childhood in the performance of practical, everyday
tasks. And when she grew older, her father, to assuage his
loneliness, took her everywhere with him. To satisfy her impulsive, zealous nature, he taught her the use of all the implements of warfare in the art of self—defense, to bear discomforts without complaint and to face danger without flinching.
The greater the difﬁculties which presented themselves, the
more audacious she grew in overcoming them, the stronger she
developed physically and the more self-reliant mentally. Despite .all this, Peace-Renown never for a moment was un-
feminine. She was sweet of nature, good of heart and demure.
All this, combined with her training, made a most harmonious
and charming combination, so that whoever saw her and heard
her speak, could never forget her. Her walk, her lovely voice


