Discrete mathematics with Applications 2019 Susanna S.

Chapter 1
Speaking mathematically
-----------------------

The aim of this book is to introduce you to a mathematical way of thinking that
can serve you in a wide variety of situations.
Often when you start work on a mathematical problem, you have only a vague sense
how to proceed.
You may begin by:
    - looking at examples,
    - drawing pictures,
    - playing around with notation,
    - rereading the problem to focus on more of its details,
    - and so forth.
And the more you need to understand, the more you need language that expresses
mathematical ideas clearly, precisely, and unambiguously.

Language:
    - variables,
    - sets,
    - relations
    - functions

1.1
Variables

A variables is sometimes thought of as a mathematical "John Doe" because you can
use it as placeholder when you want to talk about something but either:
    - you imagine that it has one or more values but you don't know what they are,
    - you want whatever you say about it to be equally true for all elements
      in a given set, and so you don't want to be restricted to considering only
      a particular, concrete value for it.

    2*x + 3 = x^2
    x^2 - 2x - 3 = 0;
    1+/- 2 = 3, -1 

Variable in a computer program is similar to a mathematical variable because it
creates a location in computer memory into which values can be placed.

Universal statement says that a certain property is true for all elements in a set.

Conditional statement says that if one thing is true then some other thing also
has to be true.

Existential statement says that there is at least one thing for which the property is true.

Universal conditional statement:
    For every animal a, if a is a dog, then a is a mammal.

1.2
The language of sets

Use of the words set as a formal mathematical term was introduce in 1879 by George
Cantor (1845-1918).
Set is collection of elements.

x is an element of S.
x is not an element of S.

{1,2,3,...,1000} - set roster notation - between brace

... = ellipsis, read as "and so forth"

The axiom of extension says that a set is completely determined by what its
elements are.
 
Set builder notation. Let S denote a set and let P(x) be a property that elements
of S may or may not satisfy.

The set of all elements x in S such that P(x) is true.
{x E S | P(x) }

If A and B are sets, then A is called a subset of B, written A included in B, if,
and only if, every element of A is also an element of B.

Let A and B be sets. A is a proper subset of B if, and only if, every element
of A is in B but there is at least one element of B that is not in A.


With introduction of set theory in the late nineteenth century, it began to seem
possible to put mathematics on a firm logical foundation by developing all of its
various branches from set theory and logic alone.

Given elements a and b, the symbol (a,b) denotes the ordered pair consisting of
a and b together with a specification that a is the first element of the pair
and b is the second element. Two ordered pair (a,b) and (c,d) are equal if, and
only if, a = c and b = d.

Let n be a positive integer and let x1, x2, x3, ..., xn be (not necessarily distinct)
elements. The ordered n tuple consists of x1, x2, ..., xn together with
the ordering: first x1, then x2, and so forth up to xn.
An ordered 2 tuple is called an ordered pair.

Given set A1, A2,..., An the Cartesion product of A1, A2,..., An, denoted 
A1 x A2 x ... x An, is the set of all ordered n tuples (a1, a2,..., an) where
a1 include in A1, a2 include in A2

Let n be a positive integer. Given a finite set A, a string of lenght n over A
is an ordered n tuple of elements of A written without parentheses or commas.
The element A are called the characters of the string.
The null string over A is defined to be string with no characters.


1.3
The language of Relations and functions

Mathematics is a language.

If A and B are sets of F is a function from A to B, then given any element x in A,
the unique element in B that is related to x by F is denoted F(x), which is read
"F of x".

Another useful way of think of a function is as a machine.

1.4
The language of graphs.


Chapter.
The logic of compound statements

Aristotle

Leibniz

Logic is a science of the necessary laws of thought, without which no employment
of the understanding and the reason takes place.

An argument is a sequence of statement aimed at demonstrating the truth of
an assertion. The assertion at the end of the sequence is called the conclusion,
and the preceding statements are called premises.
To have confidence in the conclusion that you draw from argument, you must be sure
that the premises are acceptable on their own merits or follow from other statements
that are known to be true.

In logic, the form of an arguments is distinguished from its content.
Logical analysis won't help you determine the intrinsic merit of an argument's content,
but it will help you analyze an argument's form to determine whether the truth
of the conclusion follows mecessarily from the truth of the premises.
 
 if p or q, then r
 if not r, then not p and not q.
 
 
A statement (or proposition) is a sentence that is true or false but not both.
 
 ~ or not, && denote and, and || denotes or.
 
A tautology is a statement form that is always true regardless of the truth values
of the individual statements substituted for its statement variables.
p || ~p

A contradiction is a statement form that is always false regardless of the truth
values of the individual statements substituted for its statement variables.
p && ~p

======================

Discrete mathematical structures
sixth edition
Kolman/Busby/Ross

Preface
-------





