The Elegance of the Hedgehog
_Muriel _Barbery

Lifespan | b. 1969 (Morocco)
First Published | 2006
First Published by |_Gallimard (Paris)
Original Title | L’Élégance du hérisson

_Muriel _Barbery’s novel captured the hearts of French readers, selling over a million copies in its first year.
“ Concierges do not read The German Ideology . . .”
_Renée _Michel is not who she appears to be. For the rich inhabitants of 7 _Rue de _Grenelle, the concierge who has been there for years is a good woman, the archetypal building caretaker: there is nothing particularly striking about her appearance, and she can be both helpful and gruff. But behind her slightly tough exterior, the fifty - four - year - old _Renée hides some surprising habits. At the back of her concierge’s room, she indulges her passions for Russian literature (her cat is named Leo, in homage to the author of Anna _Karenina), Japanese cinema, and Dutch painting and wonders about the nature of phenomenology. She is fascinated by those pure moments of grace when everything hangs in perfect but precarious balance.
_Paloma _Josse hides herself, too. She is twelve years old and lives with her parents in one of the very chic apartments in the building. An exceptionally gifted and rebellious child, she plans to kill herself and burn the family apartment on her thirteenth birthday. With wit and humor, she scrupulously records her deepest thoughts in a journal and tries to discover the secret of “still movement.” For _Paloma, adult life is a goldfish bowl, an empty and absurd place where false impressions reign.
The rest of the building is filled mainly with narrow-minded, bourgeois tenants who are rooted in their prejudices. However, the arrival of a wealthy Japanese widower, sophisticated and refined, upsets this world of deceptive appearances. Following the alternating points of view of the two protagonists, the novel is a philosophical journey, a reflection on the meaning of life that offers the reader multiple and unexpected sensations. Written in an elegant and lively style, it brings us spiritedly into a world that is rich, subtle, and funny. 
