Skeletons in the Closet
Homo sapiens has kept hidden an even more disturbing secret. Not only do we
possess an abundance of uncivilised cousins, once upon a time we had quite a few
brothers and sisters as well. We are used to thinking about ourselves as the only
humans, because for the last 10,000 years, our species has indeed been the only
human species around. Yet the real meaning of the word human is ‘an animal
belonging to the genus Homo’, and there used to be many other species of this
genus besides Homo sapiens. Moreover, as we shall see in the last chapter of the
book, in the not so distant future we might again have to contend with non-
sapiens humans. To clarify this point, I will often use the term ‘Sapiens’ to denote
members of the species Homo sapiens, while reserving the term ‘human’ to refer to
all extant members of the genus Homo.
Humans rst evolved in East Africa about 2.5 million years ago from an earlier
genus of apes called Australopithecus, which means ‘Southern Ape’. About 2 million
years ago, some of these archaic men and women left their homeland to journey
through and settle vast areas of North Africa, Europe and Asia. Since survival in
the snowy forests of northern Europe required di erent traits than those needed to
stay alive in Indonesia’s steaming jungles, human populations evolved in di erent
directions. The result was several distinct species, to each of which scientists have
assigned a pompous Latin name.
2. Our siblings, according to speculative reconstructions (left to right):
Homo rudolfensis (East Africa); Homo erectus (East Asia); and Homo neanderthalensis (Europe and
western Asia). All are humans.
Humans in Europe and western Asia evolved into Homo neanderthalensis (‘Manfrom the Neander Valley), popularly referred to simply as ‘Neanderthals’.
Neanderthals, bulkier and more muscular than us Sapiens, were well adapted to
the cold climate of Ice Age western Eurasia. The more eastern regions of Asia were
populated by Homo erectus, ‘Upright Man’, who survived there for close to 2
million years, making it the most durable human species ever. This record is
unlikely to be broken even by our own species. It is doubtful whether Homo
sapiens will still be around a thousand years from now, so 2 million years is really
out of our league.
On the island of Java, in Indonesia, lived Homo soloensis, ‘Man from the Solo
Valley’, who was suited to life in the tropics. On another Indonesian island – the
small island of Flores – archaic humans underwent a process of dwar ng. Humans
rst reached Flores when the sea level was exceptionally low, and the island was
easily accessible from the mainland. When the seas rose again, some people were
trapped on the island, which was poor in resources. Big people, who need a lot of
food, died rst. Smaller fellows survived much better. Over the generations, the
people of Flores became dwarves. This unique species, known by scientists as
Homo oresiensis, reached a maximum height of only one metre and weighed no
more than twenty- ve kilograms. They were nevertheless able to produce stone
tools, and even managed occasionally to hunt down some of the island’s elephants
– though, to be fair, the elephants were a dwarf species as well.
In 2010 another lost sibling was rescued from oblivion, when scientists
excavating the Denisova Cave in Siberia discovered a fossilised nger bone.
Genetic analysis proved that the nger belonged to a previously unknown human
species, which was named Homo denisova. Who knows how many lost relatives of
ours are waiting to be discovered in other caves, on other islands, and in other
climes.
While these humans were evolving in Europe and Asia, evolution in East Africa
did not stop. The cradle of humanity continued to nurture numerous new species,
such as Homo rudolfensis, ‘Man from Lake Rudolf’, Homo ergaster, ‘Working Man’,
and eventually our own species, which we’ve immodestly named Homo sapiens,
‘Wise Man’.
The members of some of these species were massive and others were dwarves.
Some were fearsome hunters and others meek plant-gatherers. Some lived only on
a single island, while many roamed over continents. But all of them belonged to
the genus Homo. They were all human beings.
It’s a common fallacy to envision these species as arranged in a straight line of
descent, with Ergaster begetting Erectus, Erectus begetting the Neanderthals, and
the Neanderthals evolving into us. This linear model gives the mistaken
impression that at any particular moment only one type of human inhabited the
earth, and that all earlier species were merely older models of ourselves. The truthis that from about 2 million years ago until around 10,000 years ago, the world
was home, at one and the same time, to several human species. And why not?
Today there are many species of foxes, bears and pigs. The earth of a hundred
millennia ago was walked by at least six di erent species of man. It’s our current
exclusivity, not that multi-species past, that is peculiar – and perhaps
incriminating. As we will shortly see, we Sapiens have good reasons to repress the
memory of our siblings.
