
1.0.1 What is computer science and how can it help us?
------------------------------------------------------
This course is about Computer Science. 
The simplest definition of computer science is that it is a science of computers.

For the purposes of this course, I think it's actually a very good definition.
Science is about understanding things. 

Even if you're using a phone or tablet instead of a laptop, these devices are still in essence computers. 

This course will help you understand computers better.

But it isn't a how-to manual for a particular piece of software.

2.1.1 The deep secret of computer science
-----------------------------------------
I'm now going to reveal to you a deep, dark secret of computer science. 
If your computer doesn't work and you don't know why, turn it off and turn it on again.
It sounds stupid, a bit of a joke.
But it does work, and it's often the most reliable thing to do in a lot of situations.


2.1.3 State
-----------
Let's talk about one of the most important types of abstractions, state.
Any computer program can be in a number of different states, and can change states.

What is a state? It's a temporary configuration of a computer system that affects how it responds to interaction.

What does it mean in practice? Any computer has two states, it's on, or it's off.
In each state, it will respond to interaction in different ways.
If it's on, it does quite a lot. If it's off, it doesn't do anything.

At any given time, a computer is in one of several states.
That state affects what the computer does, the computer changes between states due to user input,
or possibly, through its own internal decisions. 

States can change because of both internal and external factors. 

In the word processor the cursor has three states, absent, typing, and selection.
Each of these will change the behavior of the program. 
So, it's very important to know what state you're in.

A common problem when working with software, is that it suddenly stops working as you expect it to,
and it starts doing something strange, or not responding.
That is often because the software is in some different state that you don't expect.
It might be unresponsive, it might even freeze.
One of the biggest problems with internet connected applications is that they can get stuck in states,
if the internet connection fails.
This kind of failure can be unpredictable.

Understanding what states your software can be in, and what state it's in at the moment,
can really help you understand what it is doing, and to get over confusing problems.


