[MUSIC] The opening of the public's' fear had, perhaps, predictable consequences. People were competing against
one another how far you can go. Could Lenin be touched? Could Lenin's heritage be discussed? Could any aspect of Soviet
history be openly discussed. And then, of course,
varieties of views were heard. Among them, predictably,
not every view was attractive. Nationalists anti-Semitic views for the first time were also expressed. And the public sphere came
to be divided between liberals among whom Andrei Sakharov was perhaps the most significant figure. It was a remarkable moment when
Gorbachev telephoned Sakharov, who had still been in exile, and
allowed him to return to Moscow. Which was, as they say,
a message is expressed that what Sakharov had to
say in the past namely, a liberal critique of the regime,
was all right, was acceptable. And then social organizations
have reappeared. Among them, most liberal views
expressed were in the organization of the writers and especially
the organization of the cinematographers. And the films, which were made at this time, were
somewhat early and now could be shown. Directors, such as such as were profound critics of
a totalitarian regime, which made a memorable impression. But also, members of the leadership, some of them were brought into
office by Gorbachev himself, were increasingly expressing fear,
where is this leading? And indeed,
the famous incident when an unknown woman, Anatolyevna, wrote a letter to journal, in which expressed views that Stalin is not properly appreciated. To be sure,
there were some mistakes were made. But we also have to stress and understand
the glorious achievements of the soviet people under Stalin's leadership. Which gave a pause to the liberal
element in the hierarchy. But the leadership came to be divided. Those who were, well,
devoted to further change, further deepening the criticism
of the existing regime. And those who were fearful,
where did Gorbachev stand? We can conclude that when
he embarked on the series of reform he did know where
this was going to go. That is he, just like Khrushchev before,
believed that the soviet system can be remedied,
that it is possible to create, what was called,
socialism with the human face. Where the attractive
features of an egalitarian regime could be combined
with intellectual freedom. But the real issue has been, and
has always been, reforming the economy. What was there to do? Plans were drawn up. How to transform the Soviet treasury. How to bring together egalitarian party controlled economy with
the efficiency of the market. And some steps were taken, such as
allowing a degree of private enterprise. Consumer cooperatives on that small
scale were allowed to operate, such as restaurants. Restaurants would operate
on a cooperative basis. But obviously,
this was no solution to the large issue. And the plans which were drawn up, how to
transform the economy and at the same time maintain the leadership of the communist
party, were constantly discussed. And Gorbachev, who gradually became aware of the danger of where
these reforms were leading, at times he sided with the liberal reformers wanted to introduce transform
the Soviet economy on the market basis. And at other times,
he pulled back from supporting these. And so as far as the economy
was concerned at least, in the last year or two before 1991, the time of the collapse of the Communist
regime, of the Soviet regime. Gorbachev's policies became hesitant, and one pointed conservatives and
one he sided with the liberals. Aside the from the economy, the political order had to be transformed. And Gorbachev introduced
the major reform and actions to the supreme Soviet and for the first time since 1918, 1917, genuine elections took place
in the Soviet Union for a large assembly of 2,200 people. Some of the delegates were
representatives of social organizations. And in some instances, such as a delegates
assigned to the communist party, the party simply nominated them,
named them. And most elections took place. In other instances, in the case of other
organizations, genuine elections took place and genuine elections took
place also in the country as a whole. And you ended up with
a completely unwieldy assembly of 2,200 people,
which then elected a smaller group. And this produced great
excitement because, in terms of these elections,
political views could be articulated. Alternative lines of
development were articulated. And that is the very central feature of an untotalitarian society. Now, Gorbachev still took it for granted,
the leading role of the communist party. Now of course,
this was making circle out of a square. The nature of the communist
party was not meant to be an organization which competes
with other organizations. You could not preserve the leading role of
the communist party in which Gorbachev, up to this point, genuinely believed in,
and at the same time have free election. This created a great deal of excitement,
and also a great deal of uncertainty. Where are we going? This is the period which is
described as a Perestroika. Perestroika meaning rebuilding. Ultimately, it is fair to say, that it was unsuccessful. The undertaking of bringing
together the attractive features of an egalitarian
regime with the efficiency of a market economy,
bringing together the, quote, leading role of the communist
party of the Soviet Union and a democratic public sphere,
was impossible. In that sense,
Gorbachev reforms were failed, meaning that in fact the economy
not only were not remedied, but they're sure to disappear. The life, the material life,
of the Soviet people did not improve. And so where are we going to go from here? What needs to be discussed was Gorbachev's role in changing the place of the Soviet Union in the international sphere. [MUSIC]