The field of electronics is one of the great success stories of the twentieth
century. From the crude spark gap transmitters and cat's whisker detectors at
its beginning, the first half century brought an era of vacuum tube electronics
that developed considerable sophistication and found ready application in area
such as communications, navigation, instrumentation, control, and computation.
The latter half century brought solid state electronics - first as discrete
transistors, then as magnificent arrays of them within ICs (integrated circuits)
 - in a flood of stunning advances that shows no sign of abating. Compact and
 inexpensive consumer products now routinely contain many millions of transistors
 in VLSI (very large scale integration) chips, combined with elegant opto electronics
 (displays, lasers, and so on); they can process sounds, images, and data, and
 (for example) permit wireless networking and shirt pocket access to the pooled
 capabilities of the Internet. Perhaps as noteworthy is the pleasant trend toward
 increased performance per dollar. The cost of an electronic microcircuit routinely
 decreases to a fraction of its initial cost as the manufacturing process is
 perfected. In fact, it is often the case that the panel controls and cabinet
 hardware of an instrument cost more than the electronics inside.
 
 It is necessary to begin at the beginning - with talk of voltage, current, power,
 and the components that make up electronic circuits.
 
 Because you can't touch, see, smell, or hear electricity, there will be a certain
 amount of abstraction.
 
 There are two quantities that we like to keep track of in electronic circuits:
    -   voltage;
    -   current
These are usually changing with time; otherwise nothing interesting is happening.

Voltage (V/E). Officially, the voltage between two points is the cost in energy
(work done) required to move a unit of positive charge from the more negative
point (lower potential) to the more positive point (higher potential).
Equivalently, it is the energy released when a unit charge moves downhill from
the higher potential to the lower. Voltage is also called potential difference
or electromotive force (EMF). The unit of measure is the volt, with voltages
usually expressed in volts (V), kilovolts (1 kV), millivolts ( 1 mV) or
microvolts ( 1 uV). A joule (J) of work is done in moving a coulomb (C) of charge
through a potensial difference of 1 V. (The coulomb is the unit of electric charge,
and it equals the charge of approximately 6x10^18 electrons). For reasons that
will become later, the opportunities to talk about nanovolts (nV) and megavolt (MV).

Current (symbol I). Current is the rate of flow of electric charge past a point.
The unit of measure is the ampere, or amp, with currents usually expressed in
amperes (A), milliamperes (mA), microamperes (uA), nanoamperes (nA) or
occasionally picoamperes (pA). A current of 1 Amp equals a flow of 1 coulomb of
charge per second. By convention, current in a circuit is considered to flow
from a more positive point to a more negative point, even though the actual
electon flow is in the opposite direction.

Important: from these definitions you can see that currents flow through things,
and voltages are applied (or appear) across things. So you've got to say it
right: always refer to the voltage between two points or across two points in
a circuit. Always refer to current through a device or connection in a circuit.

To say something like - the voltage through a resistor - in nonsense.
However, we do frequently speak of the voltage at a point in a circuit.
This is always understood to mean the voltage between that point and ground,
a common point in the circuit that everyone seems to know about.
Soon you will, too.

We generate voltages by doing work on charges in devices such as batteries
(conversion of electrochemical energy), generators (conversion of mechanical
energy by magnetic forces), solar cells (photovoltaic conversion of the energy
of photons), etc. We get currents by placing voltages across things.

At this point you may well wonder how to see voltages and currents. The single
most useful electronic instrument is the oscilloscope, which allows you to look
at voltages (or occasionally currents) in a circuit as a function of time.
We will deal with oscilloscopes, and also voltmeters, when we discuss signals
shortly; for a preview see Appendix O, and the multimeter box later in this chapter.

In real circuits we connect things together with wires (metallic conductors),
each of which has the same voltage on it everywhere (with respect to ground, say).
We mention this now so that you will realize that an actual circuit doesn't have
to look like its schematic diagram, because wires can be rearranged.

Here are some simple rules about voltage and current:

    1.  The sum of the currents into a point in a circuit equals the sum of the
        of the currents out (conservation of charge).
        This is sometimes called Kirchhoff's current law (KCL).
        Engineers like to refer to such a point as a node.
        It follows that, for a series circuit (a bunch of two terminal things
        all connected end-to-end), the current is the same everywhere.

    2.  Things hooked in parallel have the same voltage across them.
        Restated, the sum of the voltage drops from A to B via one path through
        a circuit equals the sum by any other route, and is simply the voltage
        between A and B. Another way to say it is that the sum of the voltage
        drops around any closed circuit is zero.
        This is Kirchhoff's voltage law (KVL).

    3.  The power (energy per unit time) consumed by a circuit device is P = V I
        This is simply (energy/charge) x (charge/time).
        For V in volts and I in amps, P comes out in watts.
        A watts is a joule per second (W = J/s).
        So, for example, the current flowing through a 60 W lightbulb running
        on 120 V is 0.5 A.

Power goes into heat (usually), or sometimes mechanical work (motors), radiated
energy (lamps, transmitters), or stored energy (batteries, capacitors, inductors).
Managing the heat load in a complicated system (e.g., a large computer, in which
many kilowatts of electrical energy are converted to heat, with the energetically
insignificant by-product of a few pages of computational results) can be a
crucial part of the system design.

Soon, when we deal with periodically varying voltages and currents, we will have
to generalize the simple equation P = V I to deal with average power, but it's
correct as a statement of instantaneous power just as it stands.

Incidentally, don't call current amperage; that's strictly bush league.
The same caution will apply to the term ohmage when we get to resistance in the
next section.

1.2.2
This is long and interesting story. It is the heart of electronics.
Crudely speaking, the name of the game is to make and use gadgets that have
interesting and useful I versus V characteristic.
    -   Resistors ( I simply proportional to V)
    -   Capacitors ( I proportional to rate of change of V )
    -   diodes ( I flows in only one direction)
    -   thermistors ( temperature dependent resistor)
    -   photoresistors ( light dependent resistor)
    -   strain gauges (strain dependent resistor)

    -   transistor - are three terminal devices, in which the current that
                    can flow between a pair of terminals in controlled by the
                    voltage applied to third terminal.

It is an interesting fact that the current through a metallic conductor is
proportional to the voltage across it.

A resistor is made out of some conducting stuff - carbon, or a thin metal or
carbon film, or wire of poor conductivity.

        V
 R =    -
        I
        
It is characterized by its resistance.
R is in ohms for V in volts and I in apms
This is known as Ohm's law.
Resistors are also characterized by how much power they can safely dissipate.
Roughly speaking, resistors are used to convert a voltage to a current, and
vice versa.

The resistance of two resistors in series: R = R1 + R2

The resistance of two resistors in parallel:
           R1xR2
    R = ----------- - smaller resistor.
          R1 + R2
                              V^2
Power in resistors: P = IV = ----
                               R

Nearly all electronic circuits accept some sort of applied input (usually a voltage)
and produce some sort of corresponding output (which again is often a voltage).

We now come to the subject of the voltage divider, one of the most widespread
electronic fragments. Show us any real life circuit and we'll show you half a dozen
voltage dividers.
Voltage dividers are often used in circuits to generate a particular voltage from
a larger fixed voltage.

A perfect voltage source is a two terminal black box that maintains a fixed voltage
drop across its terminals, regardless of load resistance.
This means, that it must supply a current I = V / R.
A real voltage source can supply only finite maximum current, and in additional
it generally behaves like a perfect voltage source with a small resistance in series.
Obviously, the smaller this series resistance, the better.

A perfect current source is a two terminal black box that maintains a constant
current through the external circuit, regardless of load resistance or applied
voltage. To do  this it must be capable of supplying any necessary voltage across
its terminals. Real current sources have a limit to the voltage they can provide
and in additional they do not provide absolutely constant output current.

A battery is a real life approximation to a voltage source.

1.3 Signals
-----------
A later section in this chapter will deal with capacitor, devices whose properties
depend on the way the voltages and currents in a circuit are changing.

Pulses and square waves are used extensively in digital electronics, in which
predefined voltage levels represent one of two possible states present at any
point in the circuit. These states are called simply HIGH and LOW, and
correspond the 1 (true) and 0 (false) states of Boolean logic.



A capacitor is a devices that has two wires sticking out of it and has the property:
        Q = C V
Its basic form is pair of closely spaced metal plates, separated by some insulating
meterial, as in the rolled up axial film capacitor.
C capacitor of C Farads with V volts across its terminals has Q coulombs of stored
charge on one plate and -Q on the other. The capacitance is proportional to the
area and inversely proportional to the spacing. For the simple paraller plate
capacitor, with separation d and plate area A, the capacitance C is given by:
            C = 8.85x10^(-14)eA/d (F)
Where e - is the dielectric constant of the insulator, and the dimensions are
measured in centimeters. It takes a lot of area, and tiny spacing, to make the
sort of capacitances commonly used in circuits.

Inductors
----------
If you understand capacitors, you shouldn't have great trouble with inductors.
 V = L dI/dt


Chapter 2. Bipolar Transistors
==============================
The transistor is our most important example of an active component, a device
that can amplify, producing an output signal with more power in it than the
input signal. The additional power comes from an external source of power.

Good understanding of transistors is very important, even if most of your
circuits are mode from ICs, because you need to understand the input and output
properties of the IC in order to connect it to the rest of your circuit and to
the outside world.

There are two major species of transistors - bipolar junction transistors (BJTs)
and Field effect transistors (FETs).

A bipol ar transistor is a three terminal device, in which a small current applied
to the base controls a much larger current flowing between the collector and emitter.
It is available in two flavors (npn and pnp), with properties that meet the following
rule.
    -   Polarity - the collector must be more positive than the emitter.
    -   Junctions - the base - emitter and base - collector current applied to the
                    base controls a much larger current flowing between the collector
                    and emitter.

Chapter 3
Field effect Transistors
========================
FETs are different from the bipolar transistors that we talked about in the last
chapter.
Broadly speaking, however, they are similar devices, which we might call charge
control devices: in both cases we have a tree terminal device in which the
conduction between two electrodes depends on the availability of charge carriers,
which is controlled by a voltage applied to a third control electrode.

gate, drain, source

Here's how they differ: in a bipolar transistor the collector base junction is
back biased, so no current normally flows. Forward biasing the base emitter junction
by 0.6 V overcomes its diode, causing electrons to enter the base region, where
they are strongly attracted to the collector. Although some base current results,
most of these minority carriers are captured by the collector.
The results in a collector current, controlled is proportional to the rate
of injection of minority carriers into the base region, which is an exponential
function of V BE. You can think of a bipolar transistor as a current amplifier.

In an FET, as the name suggests, conduction in a channel by an electric field,
produced by a voltage applied to the gate electrode. There are no forward biased
junctions, so the gate draws no current.
This is perhaps the most important advantage of the FET. As with BJTs, there are
two polarities, n-channel FETs and p-channel FETs

MOSFET = Metal Oxide Semiconductor Field Effect Transistor.

Chapter 4
Operational Amplifiers
======================
In the previous three chapters we learned about circuit design with discrete
components, both active and passive. Our basic building blocks were transistors,
both bipolar (BJT) and field effect (FET), along with the resistors, capacitors,
and other that are needed to set bias, couple and block signals, create load
impedance, and so on.
With those tools we have gone quite far. We've learned how to design simple
power supplies, signal amplifiers and followers, current sources, dc and different
amplifiers, analog switches, power drivers and regulators, and even some
rudimentary digital logic.
But we've also learned to struggle with imperfections. Voltage amplifiers suffer
from nonlinearity, which you can trade off against voltage gain; differential
amplifiers have input unbalance, typically tens of millivolts, ten times more
with discrete junction FETs in bipolar design you have to worry about input
current, and the ever present V BE and its variation with temperature; in FET
design you trade absense of input current for unpredictability of V GS; and so
on.
We've seen hints that things can be better, in particular the remarkable
linearizing effects of negative feedback, and its ability to make overall circuit
performance less dependent on component imperfections. It is negative feedback
that gives the emitter degenerated amplifier its liniarity advantage over
grounded emmiter amplifier. And in the high loop gain limit.
Promised, but not yet delivered; the high gain amplifier blocks we need to get
high loop again in a feedback arrangement still involve substatial design efforts.
- the hallmark of comple circuits implementated with discrete.
With this chapter we enter the promised land! The op-amp is, essentially, a perfect
part: a complete integrated amplifier gain block, best thought of a dc coupled
differential amplifier with single ended output, and with symmetry and nearly
zero input current.
Op-amps are designed as gain engines for negative feedback, with such high gain
that the circuit performance is set almost entirely by the feedback circuitry.
Op-amps are small and inexpensive, and they should be the starting point for
nearly every analog cicuit you design. In most op-amps circuit designs we're
in the regime where they are essentially perfect: with them we will learn to
build nearly perfect amplifiers, current sources, integrators, filters, regulators,
current to voltage converters, and a host of other modules.
Op-amps are out first example of integrated circuits - many individual circuit
elements, such as transistors and resistors, fabricated and interconnected on a
single chip of silicon.

Feedback and op-amps
--------------------
We first met negative feedback in chapter 2, where we saw that the process of
coupling the output back, in such a way as to cancel some of the input signal,
improved characteristics such as linearity, flatness of response, and
predictability. As we saw quantiatively, the more negative feedback that is used,
the less the resultant amplifier characteristics depend on the characteristics
of the open loop (no feedback) amplifier, ulitmately depending only on the
properties of the feedback network itself. Operational amplifier are tipically
used in this high loop gain limit, with open loop voltage gain (no feedback) of
a million or so.

The operational amplifier is a very high gain dc coupled differential amplifier
with a single ended output. You can think of the classic long tailed pair with
its two inputs and single output as a prototype, although op-amps have much
higher gain and lower output impedance, and they allow the output to swing
through most or all of the supply range. Operational amplifiers are available
in literally thousands of types, with the universal symbol 




