Biological psychology
---------------------

 = behavioural neuroscience, biopsychology or psychobiology
 
 - interdisciplinary 

Relevant to:
 - neuroanatomy
 - neurophysiology
 - ...


Divisions:
 - physiological psychology;
        neural mechanisms of behavior through the direct manipulation and recording
        of the brain.

 - psychopharmacology
        on the mannipulation of neural activity and behavior with drugs.

 - neuropsychology
        effects of brain damage in human

 - psychophysiology
        relation between physiological activity and psychologicl process.

 - cognitive neuroscience
        bases of cognition (thought, memory, attention, complex perceptual processes).

 - comparative psychology
        biology of behavior
        

Chapter 2
=========
Evolution, Genetics and Experience

The idea that human processes fall into one of two categories:
        - physiological;
        - psychological;
has a long history in many cultures.

Descartes (1596-1650):
The universe is composed of two elements:
        1) physical matter, which behaves according to the laws of nature => scientific investigation
        2) human mind (soul, spirit) which lacks physical substance, controls human behavior, obeys no natural laws
Human brain and the mind are separate entities.


Is it inherited, or is it learned ?
-----------------------------------
Nature - nurture

Human evolution
---------------
Darwin's Theory

Complex multicellular water-dwellings organims first appeared on earth about 600 million years ago.
150 million years later, the first chordates evolved.
Chordates are animals with dorsal nerve cords.
The first chordates with spinal bones to protect their dorsal nerve cords evolved about 25 million years later.
The spinal bones are called vertebrae, and chordates that possess them are called vertebrates.
7 classes of vertebrates: 3 clasees of fishes, amphibians, reptiles, birds, mammals.

375 million years old from a time when some fish were starting to evolve into four legged land vertebrates.

410 million years ago, the first bony fishes started to venture out of the water.

Amphibians = frogs, toads, salamanders

300 million years ago reptiles = lizards, snakes and turtles evolved from a branch of amphibians.
They laid shell-coverd eggs.

180 million years ago - a new class of vertebrates evolved from one line of small reptiles => mammals.
They stopped laying eggs.

20 different orders of mammals.
Primates.
16 families of primates.

Apes = gibbons, orangutans, gorillas, and champanzees.
Have long arms and grasping hind feet.

Chmpanzees are the closest living relatives of humans.
Almost 99 percent of genes are identical in the two species.

Hominini - six genera:
        - australopithecus;
        - paranthropus
        - sahelanthropus
        - orrorin
        - pan
        - homo

Homo - eight species

Australopithecines evolved 4 million years ago in Africa.
Home species evolved 2.8 million years ago. - Large size of their brain.
The first homo spices have evolved from one species of Austrlopithecus

Early Homo species existed outside of Africa 1.85 million years.

275,000 years ago - Homo Sapiens.
130,000 Home Sapiens migrated out of Africa.

For mammals - polygyny, one male forms mating bonds with more than one female.
But 9% mammals are polygynous. Mate-bonding pattern in which enduring bonds are
formed one male and one female.

Western cultures promote monogamy, but are humans monogamous?

Mendel: dominant and recessive traits.

Chromosomes in the nucleus of each cell.
Humans have 23 pairs.
Meiosis =  egg cells and sperm cells

Each chromosome is a double stranded molecule of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA).

Structural genes contain the information necessary for the synthesis of proteins.
Proteins are long chains of amino acids.

1% of human DNA = genome
99% = junk DNA

1.2% RNA is only protein encoding.


Chapter 3
Anatomy of the nervous system
=============================

Vertebrate nervous system is composed of two divisions:
        - the central nervous system (CNS);
        - peripheral nervous system (PNS).

CNS :  nervous system located within the skull and spine
PNS :  outside the skull and spine.

CNS: brain and spinal cord.


PNS: the somatic nervous system (SNS) and autonomic nervous system (ANS).



SNS is part of PNS that interacts with the external environment
(from skin, skeletal muscles, joints, eyes, ears, and so on).

ANS is the part of the peripheral nervous system that regulates the body's internal environment.
(internal organs).

afferent -> signals from internal organs to the CNS
efferent -> carry motor signals from the CNS to internal organs.

ANS has two kinds of efferent nerves:
        - sympathetic
        - parasympathetic

Sympathetic motors from CNS in the lumbar (small part of the back) and thoracic (chest area).
Parasympathetic from brain and sacral (lower back) region of the spinal cord.


Spinal cord

12 paris of cranial nerves, which project from the brain.
        - olfactory (smell) 
        - optic 
        - vagus (motor and sensory fiber)
        
CNS if protecting by cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) which fills the subarachnoid
space, the central canal of the spinal cord.

Blood-brain barrier.

Some large molecules are critical for normal brain function - e.g., glucose can
transport through cerebral blood vessel walls.

CNS cells:
        - neurons;
        - glial cells


Neurons
=======

The brain is finely tuned electrochemical organ whose function can be severely
disturbed by the introduction of certain kinds of chemicals.
Mechanism impedes the passage of many toxic substances from the blood into the
brain: the blood - brain barrier.
This barrier is a consequence of the special structure of cerebral blood vessels.

In the brain, the cell of the blood vessel walls are tightly packed, thus forming
a barrier to the passage of many molecules - particularly proteins and other
large molecules.
Some large molecules that are critical for normal brain function (glucose).

Neurons are cells that are specialized for the reception, conduction, and transmission of
electrochemical signals.

The neuron cell membrane is composed of a lipid bilayer, or two layers of fat
molecules.

Neurons: multipolar, unipolar (bipolar).

        - mitochondria: sites of aerobic energy release
        - mucleus: DNA containing structure of the cell body.
        - endoplasmic reiculum: play a role in the synthesis of proteins and fats.
        - cytoplasm: clear internal fluid of the cell
        - ribosomes: synthesized proteins
        - goldi complex: 
        - microtubules: tubules responsible for the rapid transport of material via neutrons.

        - synaptic vesicles: store neurotransmitter molecules
        - neurotransmitters: 


Chapter 4
---------
Neural conduction and synaptic transmission
How neurons send and receive signals.

How neurons work (or malfunction) - is the membrane potential.
The membrane potential is the difference in electrical charge between the inside
and the outside of a cell.

V = -70mV => resting potential.
Potential inside the resting neuron is about 70 mV less than outside the neuron.
In its resting state, with the -70 mV charge build up across its membrane, a neuron
is said to be polarized.

The salts in neural tissue separate into positively and negatively charged
particles called ions.
There are many different kinds of ions in neurons, but this discussion focused on
only two of them:
        sodium ions (Na+)
        potassium ions (K+)

In resting neurons, there are more Na+ ions outside the cell than inside and more
K+ ions inside than outside.
Ion channels, each type of ion channel is specialized for the passage of
particular ions (e.g., Na+ or K+).
There is substantial pressure on Na+ ions to enter the resting neurons.
        1) electrostatic: from resting membrane potential
        2) Random motion for Na+ ions to move down.
Sodium - potassium pumps.
Several other classes of transporters = mechanisms in the membrane of a cell that
actively transport ions or molecules across the membrane.

When neurons fire, they release from their terminal buttons chemicals calls
neurotransmitters, which diffuse across the synaptic clefts and interact with
specialized receptor molecules on the receptive membranes of the next neurons in
the circuit. When neurotransmitter molecules bind to postsynaptic receptors,
they typically have one or two effects.
they may depolarize the receptive membrane: from -70 mV to -67 mV or
they may heperpolarize it, from -70 mV to -72 mV.
Most effects do not travel more than a couple of millimeters from their site of
generation.

In some ways, the firing of a neuron is like the firing of a gun.

Voltage activated ion channels

Mammalian motor neurons (synapse on skeletal muscles) are large and myelinated, some can conduct at speeds
of 100 meters per second. In contrast, small, unmyelinated axons conduct action potentials at about 1 meter
per second.
Maximum velocity of conduction in cats - 100 m per sec, 
                               in humans - 60 m per sec.

Neurotransmitters
.................

