CCTV = Closed-circuit televion, also known video surveillance.
Use of video cameras to transmit a signal to specific place, on a limited set of monitors.
It differs from broadcast television in that the signal is not openly transmitted,
though it may employ P2P, P2MP (point-to-multipoint), or mesh wired or wireless links.

2.
Light and television
--------------------
Light is one of the basic and greatest natural phenomena, vital not only for life on this planet,
but also very important for the technical advancement and inqenuity of the human mind in the
visual communication areas: photography, cinematography, television, and multimedia.
The main source light for our planet is our closest star - the sun.

Light is the single biggest stumbling block of science.
It behaves as though it is a wave - through the effects of refraction - but is also appears as
thoough it has particle nature - throught the well known phot effect discovered by Hertz.
It a phenomenon of a dual nature.

Maxwell asserted that light was a form of high frequency electromagnetic wave.
Speed of light = 300,000 km/s
Photo effect, where light can eject electrons from a metal whose surface is exposed to light.
The energy with which the electrons were ejected was independent of the light intensity,
which was in turn contradictory to the wave theory.
Quantum energy of photons, which represent minimum packets of energy carried by the light
itself.

The human eye is sensitive to this radiation and it picks up the various frequencies as colors.
Wavelengths.
The visible light occupies only a very little window in the range. Between 380 to 750 nm.
400 nm = violet, and 700 nm = red.
Maximum sensitivity in green color, around 555 nm.

Body het is nothing more than infrared radiation.

Retina is photosensitive area, which is composed of millions of cells, called cones and rods.
These cells can be considered a part of our nervous system.
The cones are sensitive to the medium and bright intensity of light and colors.
The rod cells are sensitive to lower light (night vision), and they do not distinguish colors.
There are approximately 10 million cones in each eye, and the number of rods is over 100 million.
30 degree is considered a standard angle of vision.

SLR = single lens reflex

Two eyes produce images that when mixed in our brain, give a stereoscopic #D impression of the
volume of space.


Primary sources (the sun, street lights, tungsten lights, monitor CRTs, LEDs)
Secondary sources (all objects that do not generate light but reflect it)

Luminous intensity (I) is the illuminating power of a primary light source, radiated in all directions.
The unit - candella (cd).
One candela is approximately the amount of light energy by an ordinary candle.

Luminous flux (F) is the luminous intensity but in a certain solid angle.
Unit - lumens (lm).
One lument is produced by luminous intensity of 1 cd in one radian of a solid angle.

1 watt of light power with 555 nm (green color) produces approximately 680 lm.

Illumination (E) is the most commonly used term in CCTV for secondary sources of light.
The illumination of a surface is the amount of luminous flux on a unit area.

lux (lx) - square meter x candelas

E = Flux / Area [lx]
F = I x w [lm]

Sunny = 100,000 lux
Sunny with some clouds = 10,000 .. 100,000 lux
overcast sky = 100 .. 10,000
home/office lighting = 100 - 1000
Street light (night) = 1 - 10
Candle = 1  --- 1 sq m on 1 m
Full moon = 0,1
Young moon = 0,01
clear night without moon = 0,001
dark cloudy night = 0,0001

Luminance (L) describes the brightness of the surface or source of light.

Illuminometer (lux-meter) is an instrument designed to measure the illumination
of objects of interest.

SLR = Single Lens Reflex camera
DSLR = Digital SLR

3.
Optics in CCTV
--------------
Concept refraction and reflection

When a light lay traveling through air or a vacuum enters a denser medium, like glass or water,
it reduces its speed by a factor n (always bigger than 1) known as the index of refraction.
Speed of light in air is 300,000 km/s - almost the same as in vacuum.
Glass - n=1,5 - 200,000 km/s

Lenses as optical elements - convex i(positive focal lenght) and concave (negative focal length).

4.
General about TV systems
------------------------
Motion picture revolution.



VMA = Video Management System is software based platform that is used:
	- manage and control video suveillance cameras;
	- recording devices
	- other security components
VSaaS = Video Surveillance as a Service is a cloud surveillance solution that is offered as a service.
VMS provides more advanced video surveillance capabilities.

