x86 emulator => https://carlosrafaelgn.com.br/Asm86/


Computer science illuminated, 2016

A computing system made up of many layers, each layer plays a specific role in the overall design of the system: Information -> Hardware -> Programming -> Operating Systems -> Applications -> Communications.

1. The Big Picture
------------------

This book is a tour through the world of computing. We explore how computers work - what they do and how they do it, from bottom to top, inside and out.

Computing system:  Computer hardware, software, and data, which interact to solve problems;
Computer hardware: The physical elements of a computing system;
Computer software: The programs that provides the instructions that a computer executes.

Information reflects the way we represent information on a computer. In many ways this is a purely conceptual level. Information on a computer is managed using binary digits, 1 and 0. So to understand computer processing, we must first understand the binary number system and its relationship to other number system (such as the decimal system, the one humans use on a daily basis). Then we can turn our attention to how we take the myriad types of information we manage - numbers, text, images, audio, video - and represent them in a binary format.

Hardware consists of the physical hardware of a computer system. Computer hardware includes devices such as gates and circuits, which control the flow of electricity in fundamental ways. This core electric circuitry gives rise to specialized hardware components such as the computer's central unit (CPU) and memory.

The programming layer deals with software, the instructions used to accomplish computations and manage data. Programs can take many forms, be performed at many levels, and be implemented in many languages. The goal is to solve problems.

OS helps manage the computer's resources. OS, such as Windows, Linux, Mac help us interact with the computer system and manage the way hardware devices, programs, and data interact.

Applications layer focuses on using computer to solve specific real world problems: design a building or play a game. The spectrum of area - specific computer software tools systems, artificial intelligence, and simulation.

Computers no longer exist in isolation on someone's desktop. We use computer technology to communicate, and that communication is a fundamental layer at which computing systems operate. Computers are connected into networks so that they can share information and resources.

Some issues of security are dealt with at low levels throughout a computer system.

An abstraction is a mental model, a way to think about something, that removes or hides complex details. An abstraction leaves only the information necessary to accomplish our goal.

Human being can actively manage about seven (plus or minus two, depending on the person) pieces of information in short - term memory at one time. This is called Miller ' s Law, based on the psychologist who first investigated.

When we abstracted with something, we interact with with it as one entity. The irrelevant details are ignored, at least for the moment.

Information hiding is a concept related to abstraction. Information hiding and abstraction are two sides of the same coin.

1.2 The history of computing

It explaining why computing system todays are designed as they are.

In the middle of the seventeenth century, Blaise Pascal, a French mathematician, built and sold gear driven mechanical machines, which performed whole number addition and subtraction. Later in the seventeenth century, a German mathematician, Gottfried Wilhelm von Leibniz, built the first mechanical device designed to do all four whole - number operation: addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division. Unfortunately, the state of mechanical gears and levers at that time was such that the Leibniz machine was not very reliable.

In the late eighteenth century, Joseph Jacquard developed what became known as Jacquard ' s loom, used for weaving cloth. The loom used of cards with holes punched in them to specify the use of specific colored thread and therefore dictate the design that was woven into the cloth. Although not a computing device, Jacquard ' s loom was the fist to make use of an important form of input: the punched card.

Ada 1843 "Who can foresee the consequences of such an invention? The Analytical Engine weaves algebraic patterns just as the Jacquard loom weaves flowers and leaves. The engine might compose elaborate and scientific pieces of music of any degree of complexity or extent."

In nineteenth century there was the next major step by a British mathematician. Charles Babbage designed what he called his analytical engine. His design was too complex for him to build with the technology of his day, so it was never implemented. His vision, however, included many of the important components of today's computers.
Ada Augusta, Countess of Lovelace, was a very romantic figure in the history of computing. Ada, the daughter of Lord Byron, was a skilled mathematician. She became interested in Babbage ' s work on the analytical engine and extended his ideas. Ada is credited with being the first programmer. The concept of the loop - a series of instruction that repeat - is attributed to her.

Alan M. Turing, another British mathematician, invented an abstract mathematical model called a Turing machine, laying the foundation for a major area of computing theory.

In 1938, Konrad Zuse of Berlin built the first mechanical binary programmable computer.

It took about 4000 years to fully reduce three - dimensional tokens to written sign. It all began about 7500 BC, when farmers made counters of clay in a dozen shapes to help keep track of their goods. In 3500 BC, after the rise of the city states, administrators started using clay balls as envelopes to hold the tokens, and in 3300-3200 BC, when record keepers started using the impression of the tokens on clay balls, dispensing with the tokens themselves.

Hardware History:
-----------------
First Generation 1951-1959
Computers were built using vacuum tubes to store information. A vacuum tube generated a great deal of heat and was not very reliable. The primary memory device of this first generation of computers was a magnetic drum that rotated under a read / write head. The input device was a card reader that read the holes punched in a IBM card. By the end of this generation, magnetic tape drives had been developed that were much faster than card readers.

Second Generation 1959-1965
The advent of the transistor. A transistor was smaller, more reliable, faster, more durable, and cheaper.

Third Generation 1965-1971
Transistor and other components for the computer were assembler by hand on printed circuit boards. ICs were much smaller, cheaper, faster and more reliable. The terminal, device with keyboard and screen, was introduced during this generation.

Fourth Generation 1971-?
Large scale integration characterizes. Micro processor and memory were made on chip technology.


Software History:
-----------------
First Generation 1951-1959
The first programs were written using machine language, the instructions built into the electrical circuitry of a particular computer. Then there was the first artificial programming languages called assembly languages, used mnemonic codes to represent each machine language instruction (used a software translator, called an assembler).
There was the division between those programmers who wrote tools (systems programmer) and those programmers who used the tools. The assembly language acted as a buffer between the programmer and the machine hardware.

    Assembly language -> Machine language

Second Generation 1959-1965
High Level languages allowed the programmer to write instructions using more English like statements.
Fortran was designed for numerical applications and Cobol was designed for business applications.
Lisp was designed mainly in artificial intelligence applications and research.

The introduction of high level languages provided a vehicle for running the same program on more than one computer (for it is needed a program called a compiler).

System programmers wrote tools like assemblers and compilers; those people who used the tools to write programs were called applications programmers.

    High - level language -> Assembly language -> Machine language

Third Generation 1965 - 1971
Put the computer resources under the control of the computer - to write a program that would determine which programs were run when. This kind of program is called an operating system.
During the first two generation only utility programs had been written to handle often needed tasks. Loaders loaded programs into memory and linkers linked pieces of large programs together. In the third generation, these utility programs were refined and put under the direction of the operation system.
Time sharing provides many different users (via terminals) to use computers. Controlling this process was an operating system that organized and scheduled the different jobs.
There were system programmers, application programmers, and computer users who were not programmers in the traditional sense.

Fourth Generation 1971-1989
Better programming techniques called structured programming, a logical, disciplined approach to programming. The languages Pascal and Modula - 2 were built on the principles of structured programming. C, a language that allows the user to intersperse assembly language statements in a high-level program, was also introduced. C++, a structured language that allows the user access to low-level statements as well, became the language of choice in the industry.
Better and more powerful OS were being developed, such as UNIX, MS-DOS, ...

    Application packages -> Systems software -> High - level language -> Assembly language -> Machine language

Fifth Generation 1990 - Present
The rise of Microsoft as a dominant player, object oriented design and programming, and WWW.
OOB languages: Java, C++.
HTML - language for formatting documents. Browser, a program that allows a user to access information from websites worldwide (Mosaic is the first graphics capable browser).


A debate has long raged about whether computing is a mathematical discipline, a scientific discipline, or an engineering discipline. Computing certainly has strong roots in mathematical logic.


The Information Layer
=====================
Binary Values and Number Systems

Numbers are crucial to computing. In addition to using a computer to execute numeric computations, all types of information that we store and manage using a computer are ultimately stored as numbers.

Let's recall that numbers can be classified into all sorts of categories:
    - natural numbers;  0 or n=k+1          :               0 1 2 3 ...
    - negative numbers; -1 or n=k-1         :  ... -3 -2 -1
    - integer numbers;  natural or negative :  ... -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 ...
    - quotient numbers; n=k%r, k!=r         :  ... 1/10 1/9 1/8 ...
    - rational numbers; integer of quotient :  
    - irrational numbers;
    - ...

Let's define the general concept of a number. A number is a unit belonging to an abstract mathematical system and is subject to specified laws of succession, addition, and multiplication. That is, a number is a representation of a value, and certain arithmetic operations can be consistently applied to such values.

Positional notation: 943 = 9 hundreds plus 4 tens plus 3 ones.
                               900    plus    40  plus 3.
The answer depends on the base of the number system you are using.
Base 10 or decimal, number system, which is the number system humans use every day.
The base of a number system specifies the number of digits used in the system.
Digits: 0 .. BASE-1
2 : 0,1
8 : 0,1,2,3,4,5,6,7
10: 0,1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9

The base also determines what the positions of digits mean: BASE^n

Positional notation is a system of expressing numbers in which the digits are arranged in succession, the position of each digit has a place value, and the number is equal to the sum of the products of each digit by its place value.

Base-2 (binary) number system is particularly important in computing. 
It is also helpful use powers of 2, such as base-8 (octal) and base-16 (hexadecimal).
Digits base-2   : 0,1
Digits base-8   : 0,1,2,3,4,5,6,7
Digits base-16  : 0,1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,A,B,C,D,E,F

 46_10 = 101110_2
 27_10 =  11011_2

Addition: 
 
 1111 <--- carry
 101110
+ 11011
-------
1001001 = 64+8+1 = 73

Substraction 
 1  11   --> borrow
 101110_46
- 11011_27
--------
  10011_2 = 16+2+1 = 19_10

To convert from binary to octal, you start at he rightmost binary digit and mark the digits in groups of three:
  111  101  100
  ---  ---  ---
   7    5    4

Converting from Base 10 to Other Bases
The rules for converting base-10 numbers involve dividing by the base into which you are converting the number.
From this division, you get a quotient and a remainder. The remainder becomes the next digit in the new number (going from right to left), and the quotient replaces the number to be converted. The process continues until the quotient is zero.

Each storage unit is called a binary digit, or bit for shot.
Bytes - by 8 bits.
Words - in bytes group, N*bites


3. Data Representation
----------------------
Data we need to store and manage on a computer must be represented in a way that captures the essence of the information we care about, and it must do so in a form convenient for computer processing.

Data is basic values or facts, whereas information is data that has been organized and or processed in a way that is useful in solving some kind of problem. Data can be unstructured and lack context. Information helps us answer questions.

Computers store, present, and help us modify many different types of data:
    numbers, text, audio, images/graphics, video

Ultimately, all of this data is stored as binary digits.

Data compression: Reducing the amount of space needed to store a piece of data;
Bandwidth: The number of bits/bytes that can be transmitted from one place to another in a fixed amount of time.

Compression ratio: the size of the compressed data divided by the size of the uncompressed data.

A data compression technique can be lossless, which means the data can be retrieved without losing any of the original information, or it can be lossy, in which case some information is lost in the process of compaction.

The natural world, for the most part, is continuous and infinite. Computers, by contrast, are finite. Computer memory and other hardware devices have only so much room to store and manipulate a certain amount of data. We always fail in our attempt to represent an infinite world on a finite machine.

Data can be represented in one of two ways: analog or digital. Analog data is a continuous representation, analogous to the actual information it represents. Digital data is a discrete representation, breaking the information up into separate elements.

Digitize of data is breaking it into pieces and representing those pieces separately.

In general, n bits can represent 2^n things because 2^n combinations of 0 and 1 can be made from n bits.

3.2 Representing Numeric Data.

Numeric values are the most prevalent type of data used in a computer system. Binary is a number system, a natural relationship exists between the numeric data and the binary values that we store to represent them.

Aren't negative numbers just number with a minus sign in front?

Signed-Magnitude Representation
In traditional decimal system, a sign is placed before a number's value, although the positive sign is often assumed. The sign represents the ordering, and the digits represent the magnitude of the number:

    Negative --------------------|------------------ Positive (sign usually omitted)
               -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0  1  2  3  4  5  6

Performing addition and subtraction with signed integer numbers can be described as moving a certain number of units in one direction or another. To add two numbers, you find the first number on the scale and move in the direction of the sign of the second as many units as specified.
There are two representations of zero: plus zero and minus zero, and it within a computer can cause unnecessary complexity.

Fixed-Sized Numbers
We can represent numbers as just integer values, where half of them represent negative numbers. The sign is determined by the magnitude of the number.
For example, 00-99: 1-49 = positive numbers, 50..99 = negative numbers (-50..-1).

                50  ... 97 98 99 0  1  2  ... 49
    Negative --------------------|------------------ Positive (sign usually omitted)
               -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0  1  2  3  4  5  6

To perform addition within this scheme, you just add the numbers together and discard any carry.
Negative: 60 -> 100 - 60 = -40 !
          99 -> 100 - 99 = -1
          51 -> 100 - 51 = -49
          50 -> 100 - 50 = 50 !!!
 
Positive + Positive: 49 + 49 = 98
Positive + Negative: 60->(-40) + 30 = 90->(-10), 90->(-10) + 30 = 120->20
Negative + Negative: 80->(-20) + 80->(-20) = 160->60(-40)

Subtraction: A - B = A + (-B)
Negative: 100-I, or 2^k - I  it is called the two's complement (or ten's complement for 10^k).

2^8:   -128..127
2^7:    -64..63
Negatives:  2^8= 256 - I;  -(2) = 256 - 2 = 254 !
            2^7= 128 - I;  -(2) = 128 - 2 = 124 !

The leftmost digit determines whether the number is negative or positive.
To Negative it is easier way to calculate the two's complement: invert the bits and add 1.
  4=00000100 -> 11111011 + 1 = 11111100 (252)
  2^8 - I = (2^8-1) - I + 1 = ~I + 1

Number Overflow
Overflow occurs when the value that we compute cannot fit into the number of bits we have allocated for the result: 127 + 3 = 130 -> (256-130)= -126 ! not +130
Overflow is a classic example of the type of problems we encounter by mapping an infinite world onto a finite machine.

Representing Real Numbers
In computing, we call all noninteger values - real values. We define a real number as a value with a potential fractional part.
We store the value as an integer and include information showing where the radix point is. There are three parts: the sign (positive/negative); the mantissa (which is made up of the digits in the value with the radix point assumed to be to the right); and the exponent, which determines how the radix point is shifted relative to the mantissa:
    sign * mantissa * 2^exp
The representation is called floating point because the number of digits is fixed but the radix point floats.

    64 bits:    1 bit for the sign, 11 bits for the exponent, 52 bits for the mantissa.

To convert a whole value from base 10 to another base, we divide by the new base, recording the remainder as the next digit to the left in the result and continuing to divide the quotient by the new base until the quotient becomes zero. Converting the fractional part is similar, but we multiply by the new base rather than dividing. The carry from the multiplication becomes the next digit to the right in the answer. The fractional part of the result is then multiplied by the new base. The process continues until the fractional part of the result is zero:

    0.75 * 2 = 1.5
    0.5  * 2 = 1.0
    0.75 =   .11
    
    .435 = 0.870 = 1.740 1.480 0.960 1.920 1.840  ~ .011011
    
    20.25 = 10100.01


3.3 Representing Text
A text document can be decomposed into paragraphs, sentences, words, and ultimately individual characters. To represent a text document in digital form, we simply need to be able to represent every possible character that may appear.
When we create a document in a word processing program such as Microsoft Word, we can specify all kinds of formatting: fonts, margins, tabs, color, and so on. This extra information is stored along with the reset of the text so that the document can be displayed and printed the way you want it.
There are a finite number of characters to represent. The general approach for representing characters is to list all of them and then assign a binary string to each character. The english language includes 26 letters. But uppercase and lowercase have to be treated separately, so that's really 52 unique characters. Punctuation characters also have to be represented, as do the numeric digits. Even the space character must have a representation.

Character set: A list of the characters and the codes used to represent each one.
ASCII Character Set.
Unicode character set.

Text Compression

1. Keyword Encoding
How often you use words such as "the", "and", "which", ... - replacing a frequently used words with a single character.
Compression ratio - 1.0 - 0.+
An extension of keyword encoding is to replace specific patterns of text with special characters.

2. Run - Length Encoding
It is sometimes called recurrence coding.
In run-length encoding, a sequence of repeated characters is replaced by a flag character, followed by the repeated character, followed by a single digit that indicates how many times the character is repeated.
 AAAAAAA = *A7 (or use binary code 0-256 after symbol as counter).
 
3. Huffman Encoding
Use variable - length bit strings to represent each character.
            Character
    00          A
    01          E
   100          L
   110          O
   111          R
  1010          B
  
3.4 Representing Audio Data
We perceive sound when a series of air compressions vibrate a membrane in our ear, which sends signals to our brain. Thus a sound is defined in nature by the wave of air that interacts with our eardrum. A stereo sends an electrical signal to a speaker to produce sound. This signal is an analog representation of the sound wave. The voltage in the signal varies in direct proportion to the sound wave. The speaker receives the signal and causes a membrane to vibrate, which in turn vibrates the air.
To represent audio data on a computer, we must digitize the sound wave, somehow breaking it into discrete, manageable pieces. This process called sampling.
In general, a sampling rate of around 40,000 times per second is enough to create a reasonable sound reproduction.

Over the past few years, several formats for audio data have become popular, including WAV, AU, AIFF, VQF and MP3.
MP3 offers a strong compression ratio than other formats

MP3 is short for MPEG-2, audio layer 3 file. MPEG = Moving Picture Experts Group, international committee that develops standards for digital audio and video compression.
MP3 employs both lossy and lossless compression. First, it analyzes the frequency spread and compares it to mathematical models of human psycho acoustics. Then, it discards information that can't be heard by humans. Finally, the bit stream is compressed using of Huffman encoding to achieve additional compression.

3.5 Representing Images and Graphics
Color is our perception of the various frequencies of light that reach the retinas. Our retinas have three types of color photoreceptor cone cells that respond to different sets of frequencies. Correspond to the colors of red, green, and blue.
All other colors perceptible by the human eye can be made by combining various amounts of these three colors.

RGB (red green blue) value:
    Black - White
    Red Green Blue
    Yellow Magenta Cyan

The amount of data that is used to represent a color is called the color depth. High Color 16 bit. True Color - 24 bits.

Digitizing a picture is the act of representing it as a collection of individual dots called pixels, a term that stands for picture elements. Each pixel is composed of a single color. The number of pixels used to represent a picture is called the resolution.

The storage of image information on a pixel by pixel basis is called a raster graphics format. BMP, GIF, and JPEG.

BMP = a bitmap file is one of the most straightforward graphic representations.
GIF = indexed color.
JPEG is designed to exploit the nature of our eyes. Humans are more sensitive to gradual changes of brightness and color over distance than we are to rapid changes.


Vector graphics is another technique for representing images. Instead of assigning colors to pixels as we do in raster graphics formats describes an images it terms of lines and geometric shapes. A vector graphic is a series of commands that describe a line's direction, thickness, and color.
By contrast, vector graphics can be resized mathematically, and these changes can be calculated dynamically as needed.
The most popular vector graphics format used on the Web today is called Flash. Flash images are stored in a binary format and require editor to create. A new vector graphics format, called SVG = scalable Vector Graphics, is expressed in plain text.

3.6 Representing Video
Video information is one of the most complex types of information to capture, compress, and still get a result that makes sense to the human eye. Some of the quality issues depend on the sophistication of video compression techniques, which are referred to as video codecs.
Codec = COmpressor/DECompressor. A video codec refers to the methods used to shrink the size of a movie so that it can be played on a computer or over a network. Most codecs are block oriented, meaning that each frame of a video is divided into rectangular blocks. Some video codecs are accomplished completely in software, whereas others require special hardware.
Video codecs employ two types of compression: temporal and spatial. Temporal compression looks for differences between consecutive frames. If most of an image in two frames hasn't changed, why should we waster space by duplicating all of the similar information? A keyframe is chosen as the basic on which to compare the differences, and its entire image is stored. For consecutive images, only the changes (called delta frames) are stored.
Spatial compression removes redundant information within a frame. This problem is essentially the same as the one we face when compressing images. Spatial video compression often groups pixels into blocks that have the same color, such as a portion of a clear blue sky. This idea is similar to run length encoding.
Various video codecs are popular today, including Sorenson, Cinepak, MPEG, and Real Video.


The Hardware Layer
==================
4. Gates and Circuits
---------------------

4.1 Computers and Electricity
Any given electronic signal has a level of voltage. A voltage level in the range of 0 to 2 volts is considered "low" and is interpreted as a binary 0. A signal in the 2 - 5 volt range is considered "high" and is interpreted as a binary 1.
A gate is a device that performs a basic operation on electrical signals. It accepts one or more input signals and produces a single output signal.
Gates are combined into circuits to perform more complicated tasks.
Three different, but equally powerful, notational methods are used to describe the behavior of gates and circuits:
    - boolean expressions; logic diagrams; truth tables.

The English mathematician George Boole invented a form of algebra in which variables and functions take on only one of two possible values (0 and 1). This algebra s appropriately called Boolean algebra.
A logic diagram is a graphical representation of a circuit. Each type of gate is represented by a specific graphical symbol. By connection those symbols in various ways, we can visually represent the logic of an entire circuit.
A truth table defines the function of a gate by listing all possible input combinations that the gate could encounter, along with corresponding output.

4.2. Gates
The gates in a computer are sometimes referred to as logic gates because each performs just one logical function.
    - Not, And, Or, Xor, Nand, Nor.

4.3 Constructing Gates
How is a gate constructed to control the flow of electricity.

Transistors is a device that acts, depending on the voltage level of the input signal, either as a wire that conducts electricity or as a resistor that blocks the flow of electricity. A transistor has no moving parts, yet it acts like a switch.
An electrical signal has a source, such as a battery or an outlet in your wall.
A transistor has three terminals: a source, a base, and an emitter. The emitter is typically connected to a ground wire. The source produces a high voltage value, 5 volts. The base value regulates a gate that determines whether the connection between the source and ground is made. If the source signal is grounded, it is pulled down to 0 volts. If the base does not ground the source signal, it stays high.

                                   Source (5V)
                                       |-------------->
                                     /
                          Base --->|
                                     \
                                       | 
                                     Emitter (ground)
    Base     Transistor    Output
     0V         off          5V
     5V         on           0V

  1 Transistor      -> Not
  2 Tr in sequence  -> Or
  2 Tr in parallel  -> And


4.4 Circuits
Circuits can be classified into two general categories: combination and sequential.
In a combinational circuit, the input values explicitly determine the output. In sequential circuit, the output is a function of the input values as well as the existing state of the circuit. Thus sequential circuits usually involve the storage of information.

    X = AB | AC = A(B|C)

    A  B  C   X
    0  0  0   0  
    0  0  1   0
    0  1  0   0
    0  1  1   0
    1  0  0   0
    1  0  1   1
    1  1  0   1
    1  1  1   1

Boolean algebra:
    Commutative         AB = BA         A|B=B|A
    Associative         (AB)C=A(BC)     (A|B)|C=A|(B|C)
    Distributive
    Identity
    Complement
    De Morgan's Law

Xor = !a & b | a & !b     ~ 11 Transistors


Adder
The result of adding two binary digits could potentially produce a carry value. A circuit that computes the sum of two bits and produces the correct carry bit is called a half adder.

    A  B   Sum   Carry                Sum   = Xor(A,B)
    0  0   0     0                    Carry = And(A,B)
    0  1   1     0
    1  0   1     0
    1  1   0     1

       ~ 11+3 = 15 Transistors

A circuit called a full adder takes the carry-in value into account.

s1, c1  = hadd(a,b)
s2, c2 =  hadd(c, s1)
c = c1 | c2

       ~ 2*15+3 = 33 Transistors

 8bits Adder = 7  Fadd + 1 hadd =  7*33 + 15 = 231+15 = 246 Transistors.
16bits Adder = 15 Fadd + 1 hadd = 15*33 + 15 = 495+15 = 510 Transistors. 

4.5 Circuits as Memory
They can store information.
Only one type of memory: S-R latch. It stores a single binary digit (1 or 0).

CHIP SR_Larch {
    IN s, r;
    OUT x, y;
    PARTS:
    Nand(a=s, b=y, out=x);
    Nand(a=r, b=x, out=y);
}

    S  R    X    Y
    1  1    X   !X
    0  1    1    0
    1  0    0    1
    0  0    ?    ?

4.6 Integrated Circuits
An integrated circuits (IC) = chip is a piece of silicon on which multiple gates have been embedded.
IC technology (number of gates):
    SSI (small scale integration)           1..10
    MSI (medium scale integration)          10..100
    LSI (large scale integration)           100..100,000
    VLSI (very large scale integration)     >100,000

4.7 CPU Chips
CPU = central processing unit.

5. Computing Components
-----------------------
5.1 Individual Computer Components

Central processor inside the laptop: Core 2 is a type of processor, and Duo refers to the presence of two the these processors (called cores) on a single chip. The 2.66GHz tells how fast the processors are. FSB (front side bus) between processor and the outside world - 1066MHz FSB. 6MB cache = cache memory, it is a small, fast memory that is usually built into the processor chip. Thus, two cores have direct access to cache without using the FSB.

5.2 The Stored Program Concept
A major defining point in the history of computing was the realization in 1944 - 1945 that data and instructions to manipulate the data were logically the same and could be stored in the same place. The computer design built upon this principle, which became known as the von Neumann architecture, is still the basis for computers today. Five component of the von Neumann architecture:
    - memory unit
    - ALU unit
    - Input unit
    - Output unit
    - Control unit

Memory is collection of cells, each with a unique physical address.
CPU: Control and ALU units

ALU = arithmetic / logic unit is capable of performing basic arithmetic operations such as adding, subtracting, multiplying, and dividing two numbers. And also logical operation such as And, Or, and Not.

An input unit is a device through which data and programs from the outside world are entered into the computer.
An output unit is a device through which results stored in the computer memory are made available to the outside world.

The control unit is the organizing force in the computer, for it is in charge of the fetch execute cycle. There are two special registers in the control unit. The instruction register (IR) contain the instruction that is being executed, and the program counter (PC) contains the address of the next instruction to be executed.
Though bus data travels in the computer. Each bus carries three kinds of information: address, data, and control.
Cache memory is a small amount of fast access is made, the CPU checks whether the data is stored in the cache memory.
Pipelining uses to speed up the fetch execute cycle. This technique splits an instruction into smaller steps that can be overlapped.

In a personal computer, the components in a von Neumann machine reside physically in a printed circuit board called the motherboard. The motherboard also has connections for attaching other devices to the bus, such as a mouse, a keyboard, or additional storage devices.

A computer is a device that can store, retrieve, and process data.

Instructions and data are both addressable. Instructions are stored in contiguous memory locations; data to be manipulated are stored together in a different part of memory. To start the fetch execute cycle, the address of the first instruction is loaded into the program counter. The processing cycle includes four cycles:
    - fetch the next instruction;
    - decode the instruction;
    - get data if needed;
    - execute the instruction.

Fetch:  Get instruction from address in PC and load it in IR. Then PC=PC+1
Decode: IR is decoded into control signal that say how to access data from an input device, to send data to an output device, or to perform some operation on a data value.
If need there is requiring of additional memory access.
Execute: Get result in some register or memory cells.

5.3 Embedded Systems
Embedded systems are computers that are designed to perform a narrow range of functions as part of a larger system.

5.4 Parallel Architectures
There are four general forms of parallel computing:
    - bit level;
    - instruction level;
    - data level;
    - task level.
Bit level parallelism is based on increasing the word size of a computer.
Instruction level parallelism is based on the idea that some instructions in a program can be carried out independently in parallel. Superscalar machine can do several operation in different units (two ALUs for example).
Data-level parallelism is based on the idea that a single set of instructions can be run on different data sets at the same time. SIMD (single instruction, multiple data( and relies on a control unit directing multiple ALUs to carry out the same operation.
Task level parallelism is based on the idea that different processors can execute different tasks on the same or different data sets.

Multicore processors have multiple independent cores, usually CPUs.
SMPs = symmetric multiprocessors have multiple identical cores.
A distributed computer is one in which multiple memory units are connected through a network.
A cluster is a group of stand-alone machines connected through an off the shelf network.

The Programming Layer
=====================
6. Low-Level Programming Languages and Pseudocode
6.1 Computer Operations
The programming languages we use must mirror the types of operations that a computer can perform.
The instructions that manipulate data are stored within the machine along with the data. To change what the computer does to the data, we change the instructions.
Store, retrieve, and process are actions that the computer can perform on data.

6.2 Machine Language
The instructions builds into the hardware of a particular computer.
Each machine language instruction performs only one very low-level task.
It is true that very few programs are written in machine language today, primarily because they represent in ineffective use of a programmer's time.
By definition, machine code differs from machine to machine. Each type of CPU has its own machine language that it understands.

Pep/8 is the virtual machine. It has 39 machine language instructions.
The memory unit of the Pep/8 made up of 65,536 bytes of storage.
ALU is 16 bits in length.

PC = program counter, which contains the address of the next instruction to be executed
IR = instruction register, which contains a copy of the instruction being executing
A  = accumulator

The accumulator is used to hold data and the results of operations.
There are two parts to an instruction:
    - the instruction specifier = such as "add"
    - (optional) 16 bit operand specifier - either the operand inself or the address of where the operand is to be found.

Instruction specifier:
    - opcodes (operation codes) from 4 to 8 bits
    - register 3 bit = 0 
    - address mode 0 to 2

Addres mode:
    000 = immediate, operand is in the operand specifier
    001 = direct, operand is the memory address

Unary instructions - without operand

Opcodes:
    0000 - unary stop.
    1100 - load the operand into the A register (word = 16 bits)
    1110 - store the contents of the A register into the operand
    0111 - add operand to the A register
    1000 - substract the operand from the A register
    01001 - character input to the operand  - from input device (only direct access)
    01010 - character output from the operand - to output device immidiate or direct

6.3. A program example

    // Output 'Hello'
    01010000 00000000_01001000      50 00 48          H
    01010000 00000000_01100101      50 00 65          e
    01010000 00000000_01101100      50 00 6C          l
    01010000 00000000_01101100      50 00 6C          l
    01010000 00000000_01101111      50 00 6F          0
    00000000                        00              STOP

zz - end of program for simulator

6.5 Assembly language
Assembly languages assign mnemonic letter codes to each machine language instruction.
A program called an assembler reads each of the instructions in mnemonic form and translates it into machine language equivalent.

Assembly mnemonic:          STOP, LDA, STA, ...
Operand, mode specifier:    0x008B,i

Beginning with assembly languages, most programming languages have two kinds of instructions:
    - instructions to be translated
    - instructions to the translating program.

Assembler directives: .ASCII, .BLOCK, .WORD, .END

    // Output 'Hello'
    CHARO   0x0048,i        //  H
    CHARO   0x0065,i        //  e
    CHARO   0x006C,i        //  l
    CHARO   0x006C,i        //  l
    CHARO   0x006F,i        //  0
    STOP
    .END

Assembly process: Program in assembly language => Assembler => Program in machine code
nu
        BR  main
sum:    .WORD   0x0000
num1:   .BLOCK  2
num2:   .BLOCK  2

main:   LDA     sum,d
        DECI    num1,d
        ADDA    num1,d
        DECI    num2,d
        ADDA    num2,d
        STA     sum,d
        DECO    sum,d
        STOP
        .END

BR
BRLT    if A is less than zero
BREQ    if A is equal to zero


        BR  main
sum:    .WORD   0x0000
num1:   .BLOCK  2
num2:   .BLOCK  2

negMsg: CHAR0   0x0045,i   ; 'E'
        BR      finish
main:   LDA     sum,d
        DECI    num1,d
        ADDA    num1,d
        DECI    num2,d
        ADDA    num2,d
        BRLT    negMsg
        STA     sum,d
        DECO    sum,d
finish: STOP
        .END

CPA ; compare operand with A 

; Sum limit number (limit is first number)
        BR  main
sum:    .WORD   0x0000
num:    .BLOCK  2
limit:  .BLOCK  2
counter:.WORD   0x000

main:   DECI    limit,d
loop:   DECI    num,d
        LDA     num,d
        ADDA    sum,d
        STA     sum,d
        LDA     counter,d
        ADDA    1,i
        STA     counter,d
        CPA     limit,d
        BREQ    quit
        BR      loop
quit:   DECO    sum,d
        STOP
        .END

6.5 Expressing Algorithms
We expressed the solution to each problem in paragraph form and then wrote the code. In computing, the plan for a solution is called an algorithm. Pseudocode is a language that allows us to express algorithms in a clearer form.
There are not special grammar rules for pseudocode, but to express actions we must be able to represent the following concepts:
    Variables: name that appear in pseudocode algorithms refer to places in memory where values are stored.
    Assignment: we must have a wary to put variables in a values: Set sum to 0.
    Input/Output: We can use the word write for input and the word read for input.
    Selection: Allows a choice between performing an action or skipping it. If-Else-...
    Repetition: Allows instructions to be repeated. WHILE (boolean expression)

    Set sum to 0
    Read num1
    Set sum to sum + num1
    Read num2
    Set sum to sum + num1
    If (sum < 0)
        Write 'E'
    Else
        Wrire sum


    Set counter to 0
    Set sum to 0
    Read limit
    While (counter < limit)
        Read num
        Set sum to sum + num
        Set counter to counter + 1
    Write sum

6.6 Testing
There is far more to testing than just running the program once.
We design and implement a test plan. A test plan is a document that specifies how many times and with which data a program must be run to thoroughly test the program. Each set of input data values is called a test case.
Several approaches to testing can be used to guide this process. Code coverage is an approach that designs test case to ensure that each statement in the program is executed. Because the code is visible to the tester, this approach is also called clear-box testing. Data coverage, another approach, calls for designing test cases to ensure that the limits of the allowable data are covered. Because this approach is based solely on input data and not the code, it is also called black-box testing. Often testing entails a combination of these two approaches.

Test plan implementaion involves running each of the test cases described in the test plan and recording the results. If the results are not as expected, you must go back to your design and find and correct the error.

    Reason for Test Case - Input Test - Expected Output - Observed Output

7. Problem Solving and Algorithms
---------------------------------
Computer science is sometimes defined as "the study of algorithms and their efficient implementation in a computer".
Because algorithms operates on data, we examine ways to structure data so that it can be more efficiently processed.

7.1 How to Solve Problems
1) You have to understand the problem.
    What is the unknown? What are the data? What is the condition?
2) Find the connection between the data and the unknown.
3) Carry out your plan.
4) Examine the solution obtained.

If you are given a problem or task verbally, you typically ask questions until what you are to do is clear. You ask when, why, and where until your task is completely specified.

You should never reinvent the wheel. If a solution exists, use it.

We constantly break up a large problem into smaller units we can handle.

An algorithms (a plan of the solution) is a set of instructions for solving a problem or subproblem in a finite amount of time using finite amount of data.

The computer problem solving process includes four phases:
    the analysis and specification phase
    the algorithm development phase
    the implementation phase
    the maintenance phase

The listing of the main tasks is called the main module. Use English or pseudocode to restate the problem in the main module.

7.2 Algorithms with Simple Variables
Simple (atomic) are those that cannot be divided. They are value stored in a place.
Numbers = simple variables.

 - Selection

Top level (main) module just expresses the tasks:
    Write "Enter the temperature"
    Read temperature
    Determine dress

Determine dress
- - - - - - - -
IF (t > 90)
    Write "Texas weather: wear shorts"
ELSE IF (t > 70)
    Write "Ideal weather: short sleeves are fine"
ELSE IF (t > 50)
    ...
ELSE
    ...

 - Repetition

There are two basic types of loops:
    - count controlled
That repeats a process a specified number of times.
There are three distinct parts to this kind of loop, which make use of a special variable called a loop control variable:
        - initialized to a starting value;
        - testing, reach a predetermined value;
        - incrementation.
    Set count to 0
    WHILE (count < limit) // boolean expression
        ...
        Set count to count + 1

Count is 0, 1, 2, ... limit-1

"While" loop is called a pretest loop, because the testing takes place before the loop is executed.

    - event controlled
        - initialized to a starting value;
        - testing, reach a predetermined value;
        - updated.

Structures in which one control structure is embedded within another structure are called nested structures.

7.3 Composite Variables
String of letters within quotations to represent a message to be written out.
Letters within quotations are called strings.

    - Arrays
An array is a named collection of homogeneous items in which individual items are accessed by their place within the collection. The place within the collection is called an index.
    integer numbers[position]
    Write "Enter 10 integer numbers, one per line"
    Set position to 0
    WHILE (position < 10)
        Read in numbers[position]
        Set position to position + 1

Algorithms with arrays are classified into three categories:
    - searching;
        It is just what it says - going through the items in the array one at a time looking for a particular value.
    - sorting;
        It is putting the items in the array into order.
    - processing.
        It is catch all phrase that encompasses all other computing done to or with items in an array.

  - Records
It is a named heterogeneous groups of items in which individual items are accessed by name.
The collection can contain integers, real value, strings, or any other type of data.
Records are good choices for bundling items together that relate to the same object.

     Employer
    +--------------+
    |              | name
    +--------------+
    |              | age
    +--------------+
    |              | hourlyWage
    +--------------+

    Employer employer  // employer - variable, Employer - type
    Set employer.name to "Frank Jones"
    Set employer.age to 32
    Set employer.hourlyWage to 27.50

7.4 Searching Algorithms
    - Sequential Search
'Look for' is a synonym for searching. Our first searching algorithm follows this definition of searching exactly. We look at each item in turn and compare it to the one for which we are searching. If it matches, we have found the item. If not, we look at the next item.
    Set position to 0
    Set found to FALSE
    WHILE (position < size AND NOT found)
        IF (number[position] equals searchItem)
            Set found to TRUE
        ELSE
            Set position to position + 1

    - Sequential Search in a Sorted Array
Rather than being specific about the number of items in the array, we use a variable "length" to tell us how many valid items in the array.

    Set index to 0
    Set found to FALSE
    Set length to SIZE
    WHILE (index < length AND NOT found)
        IF (data[index] equals searchItem)
            Set found to TRUE
        ELSE IF (data[index] > searchItem)
            Set index to length
        ELSE
            Set position to position + 1

    - Binary search
Algorithms assumes that the items in the array being searched are sorted.
Rather than looking for the item starting at the beginning of the array and moving forward sequentially, the algorithm begins at the middle of the array in a binary search.

    Set first to 0
    Set last to SIZE-1
    Set found to FALSE
    WHILE (first < last AND NOT found)
        Set middle to (first + last)/2
        IF (data[middle] equals searchItem)
            Set found to TRUE
        ELSE 
            IF (searchItem < data[middle])
                Set last to middle - 1
            ELSE
                Set first to middle + 1

In the binary search algorithm realy faster than sequential search.

7.5 Sorting
Sorting is putting things in order.

    - Selection Sort
If we handed you a set of index cards with the names and asked you to put them in order by name, you would probably go through the cards looking for the name that comes first in the alphabet.

    WHILE more cards in first deck
        Find smallest left in the first deck
        Move to new deck

This algorithms is simple, but it has one drawback: It requires space for two complete decks.
We can instead of writing this name on a second list to exchange it with the name currently in the position where the new name should go.

    Set firtUnsorted to 0
    WHILE (not sorted yet)                              (1)
        Find smallest unsorted item                     (2)
        Swap firtUnsorted item with the smallest        (3)
        Set firtUnsorted to firtUnsorted + 1

This algorithm includes only three abstract steps.

    - Not sorted yet
    firstUnsorted < length-1

    - Find smallest unsorted item
    Set indexOfSmallest to firtUnsorted
    Set index to indexOfSmallest+1
    WHILE (index <= length-1)
        IF (data[index] < data[indexOfSmallest])
            Set indexOfSmallest to index
        Set index to index+1

    - Swap firstUnsorted with smallest
    Set tempItem to data[firtUnsorted]
    Set data[firtUnsorted] to data[indexOfSmallest]
    Set data[indexOfSmallest] to tempItem


    - Bubble Sort
Starting with the last array element, we compare successive pairs of elements, swapping them whenever the bottom element of the pair is smaller than the one above it. In this way, the smallest element bubbles up to the top of the array.
The bubble sort is a very slow sorting algorithms. Sorting algorithms are usually compared based on the number of iterations it takes to sort an array, and this approach takes one iteration for every item in the array except the last.

    Set firtUnsorted to 0
    Set swap to TRUE
    WHILE (firtUnsorted < length-1 AND swap)
        Set swap to FALSE
        Bublle up the smallest item in unsorted part        (1)
        Set firtUnsorted to firtUnsorted + 1

    - Bublle up the smallest item in unsorted part
    Set index to length-1
    WHILE (index > firstUnsorted)
        IF (data[index] < data[index-1])
            Swap data[index] and data[index-1]      (*)
            Set swap to TRUE
        Set index to index-1


    - Insertion Sort
    Set current to 1
    WHILE (current < length)
        Set index to current
        Set placeFound to FALSE
        WHILE (index > 0 AND NOT placeFound)
            IF (data[index] < data[index-1])
                Swap data[index] and data[index-1]
                Set index to index-1
            ELSE
                Set placeFound to TRUE
        Set current to current+1

7.6 Recursive Algorithms
When an algorithms uses its own name within itself, it is called a recursive algorithm. Recursion is the ability of an algorithm to call itself, it is an alternative control structure to repetition (looping).
Each recursive algorithms has at least two cases: the base and the general case.
The base is the one to which we have an answer; the general case expresses the solution in terms of a call to itself with the a smaller version of the problem, eventually the program reaches the base case, where an answer is known.
Associated with each recursive problem is some measure of the size of the problem. The size must become smaller with each recursive call. The first step in any recursive solution is to determine the size factor.

New control structure: the subprogram statement.
We can give a section of code a name and then use that name as a statement in another part of the program.
When the name is encountered, the processing in the other part of the program halts while the name code executes.
The place where the name of the code appears is known as the calling unit.
Subprograms are powerful tools for abstraction. If a subprogram needs information to execute its task, we place the name of the data value in parentheses by the subprogram heading. If the subprogram returns a value to the calling unit, it uses the word RETURN.

Recursive Factorial
    N! = N * (N-1)!
    0! = 1

The size factor is N
Base    case Factorial(0) = 1
General case Factorial(N) = N * Factorial(N-1)

    - Factorial(N)
    IF (N equal 0)
        RETURN 1
    ELSE
        RETURN N * Factorial(N-1)

The data being given each time is called argument.
If N < 0 then this situation is called infinite recursion (an infinite loop).

Recursive Binary Search
---
    Write BinarySearch(0, lenght-1) // True or False

    - BenarySearch(first, last)
    IF (first > last)
        RETURN FALSE
    ELSE
        Set middle to (first + last)/2
        IF (item equals data[middle])
            RETURN TRUE
        ELSE
            IF (item < data[middle])
                BinarySearch(first, middle-1)
            ELSE
                BinarySearch(middle+1, first)

Quicksort
Developed by C.A.R. Hoare, is based on the idea that it is faster and easier to sort two small lists than one large one.
The basic strategy of this sort is divide and conquer.

                             A..Z
                         A..L   M..Z
                      A..F  G..L  M..R  S..Z

    - Quicksort(first, last)
    IF (first < last)
        Select splitVal
        Split (splitVal)
        QuickSort(first, splitPoint-1)
        QuickSort(splitPoint+1, last)

SpitVal - 1) as first element = data[first]

    - Select splitVal
    Set splitVal to data[first]

    - Split(splitVal)
    Set left to first+1
    Set right to last
    WHILE (left <= right)
        Increment left until data[left] > splitVal OR left > right
        Decrement right until data[right] < splitVal OR left > right
        IF (left < right)
            Swap data[left] and data[right]
    Set SplitPoint to right
    Swap data[first] and data[splitPoint]
    Return splitPoint

Quicksort is an excellent sorting approach if the data to be sorted is in random order. If the data is already sorted, however, the algorithm degenerates so that each split has just one item in it.

7.7 Important Threads
Information Hiding
Name to a task and not worrying about how the task is to be implemented until later.
Deferring the details in a design has distinct advantages.
This practice, called information hiding, make the details at a lower level inaccessible during the design of the higher levels.

Abstraction
Abstraction and information hiding are two sides of the same coin. Information hiding is the practice of hiding details;
abstraction is the result with detail hidden.
Data abstraction is the separation of the logical view of data from its implementation.
Procedure abstraction refers to the view of actions.
Control abstraction refers to the view of a control structure.

Naming Things.
Names are called identifiers.

Testing
Clear box and Black box.

8. Abstract Data Types and Subprograms
--------------------------------------
In the programming layer, we have moved from concreteness of machine language, to assembly language, to pseudocode, to expressing algorithms.
Now talk about abstract containers: composite structures for which we do not know the implementation. These abstract containers are called abstract data types (ADT). We know their properties and operations and we understand which types of values they can contain, but we have no information about their internal structure or implementation.

8.1 What Is an Abstract Data Type?
ADT is a container whose properties (data and operations) are specified independently of any particular implementation.
The goal in design is to reduce complexity through abstraction.
In computing, we view data from three perspectives:
    - the application level
    - the logical level
    - the implementation level

The application (or user) level is the view of the data within a particular problem.
The logical (or abstract) level is an abstract view of the data values (the domain) and the operations that manipulate them.

Data structure - the implementation of a composite data field in an abstract data type.
Containers are objects whose role is to hold and manipulate other objects.

8.2 Stacks
A stack is an abstract composite structure in which accesses are made at only one end.
You can insert an items as the first one and you can remove the first one.
This design models many things in real life.
LIFO - "last in, first out".

Push = adding an item to the stack.
Pop  = removing an imem from the stack.

A stack does not have the property of length, so there is no operation that returns the number of items on the stack.

IsEmpty operation.

    - Reverse
    WHILE (more data)
        Read value
        Push(myStack, value)
    WHILE (NOT isEmpty(myStack))
        Pop(myStack, value)
        Write value

8.3 Queues
A queue is an abstract structure in which items are entered at one end and removed from the other end.
FIFO = "first in, first out"
Insertions are made at the rear of the queue and removals are made from the from the front of the queue.

Enqueue (Insert) = for the insertion operation.
Dequeue (Remove) = for the deletion operation.

Here is an algorithm that reads in data values and prints them in the order in which they were entered:

    - In Ordering
    WHILE (more data)
        Read value
        Enque(myQueue, value)
    WHILE (NOT isEmpty(myQueue))
        Deque(myQueue, value)
        Write value

8.4 Lists
Lists: guest, grocery, class, things-to-do lists.
Three properties characterize lists:
    - the items are homogeneous
    - the items are linear
    - list have varying lengths
By linear we mean that each item except the first has a unique component that comes before it, and each item except the last has a unique component that comes after it.

Insert = to insert an item
Delete = to delete an item
isThere = check whether an item is there
GetLength = report the number of items in a list

Reset, GetNext, MoreItems, ...

An array is a built-in structure, a list is an abstract structure.

A list may also be visualized as a linked structure. A linked structure is based on the concept of a node.
A node consists of two pieces of information: the user's data and a link or pointer that indicates where to find the next node. The end of the list is a link that contains null.
Unordered lists are those for which order is unimportant.

Sorted lists are those where there is a semantic relationship between items in the list.

    WHILE (more data)
        Read value
        Insert(myList, value)
    Reset(myList)
    WHILE (MoreItems(myList))
        GetNext(myList, nextItem)
        Write nextItem

8.5 Trees
Abstract structures such as lists, stack, and queues are linear in nature.
Only one relationship in the data is being modeled. Items are next to each other in a list or are next to each other in terms of time in a stack or queue.
Depicting more complex relationships requires more complex structures. For example, a hierarchical structure.
Such hierarchical structures are called trees. Binary trees, each node in the tree can have no more than two children.

Binary Trees is an abstract structure in which each node is capable of having two successor nodes, called children.
The beginning of the tree is a unique starting node called the root, which is not the child of any node.
Each node in the tree may have zero, one, or two children. The node to the left of a node, if it exists, is called its left child. The same is for right child.
If a node in the trees has no children it is called a leaf.
Every node (except the root) has a unique (single) parent.

 - Binary Search Trees
A tree is analogous to an unordered list. To find an item in the tree, we must examine every node until either we find the one we want or we discover that it isn't in the tree.
A binary search tree is like a sorted list in theat there is a semantic ordering in the nodes.
In addition to binary tree, a binary search tree has a semantic property that charactirizes the values in the nodes in the tree: The value in any node is greater than the value in any node in its left subtree and less than the value in any node in its right subtree.

 - Searching a Binary Search Tree

current - point to a node
info(current) - user's data in the node
left(current) - points to the root of the left subtree
right(current) -
null - special value

    - IsThere(tree, item)
    IF (tree is null)
        RETURN FALSE
    ELSE
        IF (item equal info(tree))
            RETURN TRUE
        ELSE
            IF (item < info(tree))
                IsThere(left(tree), item)
            ELSE
                IsThere(right(tree), item)

With each comparison, either we find the item or we cut the tree in half.
Well, not exactly. The shape of a binary tree is not always well balanced.
The shape of the tree is determined by the order in which items are entered into the tree.
 n-level, it can be 4 for 15 or 14.

    - building a binary search Tree
One clue lies in the search algorithm. If we follow the search path and do not find the item, we end up at the place where the item would be.

    - Insert(tree, item)
    IF (tree is null)
        Put item in tree
    ELSE
        IF (item < info(tree))
            Insert(left(tree), item)
        ELSE
            Insert(right(tree), item)

    - Print(tree)
    IF (tree is NOT null)
        Print(left(null))
        Write info(tree)
        Print(right(tree))

    - Lenght(tree)
    IF (tree is null)
        RETURN 0
    ELSE
        RETURN length(left(tree)) + Lenght(right(tree)) + 1

8.6 Graphs
To represent other types of relationships such as sibling, cousin, aunt, ...
Trees are a useful way to represent relationships in which a hierarchy exists.
If we remove the restriction that each node may have only one parent node, we have a data structure called a graph.
A graph is made up of a set of nodes called vertices and a set of lines called edges (or arcs) that connect the nodes.

The vertices in the graph represent objects, and the edges describe relationships among the vertices.

Undirected graph - a graph in which the edges have no direction.
Directed graph (digraph) - a graph in which each edge is directed from one vertex to another.

Adjacent vertices - two vertices that are connected by an edge.
Path - a sequence of vertices that connects two nodes in a graph.

    - Creating a graph
List, stacks, queues, and trees are all just holding containers.
A graph, in contract, has algorithms defined upon is that actually solve classic problems.
A lot of information is represented in a graph: the vertices, the edges, and the weights.

            A           B           C
    A       -          200          -
    B     100          -          -
    C       -          400          -

    - Graph Algorithms
    Search: a depth-first search, a breadth-first seach, a single-source shortest-path search

    - Depth-First Search
    Set found to FALSE
    Push(myStack, startVertex)
    WHILE (NOT isEmpty(myStack) AND NOT found)
        Pop(myStack, tempVertex)
        IF (tempVertex equals end Vertex)
            Write endVertex
            Set found to TRUE
        ELSE IF (tempVertex not visited)                              *
            Write tempvertex
            Push all unvisited vertices adjacent with tempVertex      *
            Mark tempVertex as visited                                *
    IF (found)
        Write "Found"
    ELSE
        Write "Not found"


    - Breadth First Search(StartVertex, endVertex)
// How can you get from A to B with the fewest numbers of stops.
// We use a queue.
    Set found to FALSE
    Enque(myQueue, startVertex)
    WHILE (NOT isEmpty(myQueue) AND NOT found)
        Deque(myQueue, tempVertex)
        IF (tempVertex equals end Vertex)
            Write endVertex
            Set found to TRUE
        ELSE IF (tempVertex not visited)                              *
            Write tempvertex
            Enque all unvisited vertices adjacent with tempVertex      *
            Mark tempVertex as visited                                *
    IF (found)
        Write "Found"
    ELSE
        Write "Not found"

    - Single-Source Shortest-Path Search

8.7 Subprograms
    - Parameter Passing
A parameter list is a list of the identifiers or values with which the subprogram is to work; it appears in parentheses beside the subprogram name.
Identifiers in subprogram are called parameters. In when called these called arguments.
The arguments represent actual variables in the calling unit with which the subprogram is to work.

    - Value and Reference Parameters
There are two basic ways of passing parameters: by value and by reference (or address).
If value then calling unit gives a copy of the argument.
Subprogram can modify the copy, but the original variable will not be changed.

9. Object-Oriented Design and High-Level Programming Languages
--------------------------------------------------------------
9.1 Object-Oriented Methodology
Self-contained entities called objects, which are composed of both data and operations that manipulate the data.
Object-oriented design focuses on the objects and their interactions within a problem.

OOD (Object-oriented design) are the concepts of classes and objects.
An object is a thing or entity that makes sense within the context of the problem.
A group of simila objects is described by an object class (or class).
Any particular object is an instance (concrete example) of the class.

Objects communicate with one another by sending messages (invoking subprograms).
A class contains fields that represent the properties and behaviors of the class.
A field can contain data values and/or methods.

    - Design Methodology
Stages: brainstorming, filtering, scenarios, responsibility algorithms.

    - Scenarios
The goal of the scenarios phase is to assign responsibilities to each class.
A class encapsulates its data (knowledge). Encapsulation is a key to abstraction.

9.2 Translation Process
A program written in assembly language is input to the assembler, which translates the assembly-language instructions into machine code. Then the machine code is executed.

    - compilers
The algorithms that translate assembly-language instructions into machine code are very simple.
High-level languages provide a richer set of instructions that makes the programmer's life even easier.
Programs that translate programs written in a high-level language are called compilers.

    - interpreters
An interpreter is a program that translates and executes the statements in sequence.
Interpreters can be viewed as simulators or virtual machines.

FORTRAN, COBOL, ALGOL were compiled.
Lisp was interpreted.

Java (from 1996) was portable. Java is compiled into a standard machine language called Bytecode.
A software interpreter called the JVM (Java Virtual Machine) takes the Bytecode program and executes it.

9.3 Programming Language Paradigms
There are two main paradigms: imperative and declarative.

    - Imperative Paradigm
The von Neumann model of sequential instructions that operates on values in memory greatly influenced the most common model of a programming languages: FORTRAN, BASIC, C, Pascal, C++.
In this paradigm, the program describes the processing necessary to solve the problem.
It characterized by sequential execution of instructions, the use of variables that represent memory locations, and the use of assignment statement that change the values of these variables.

    - Procedure Paradigm
It is an imperative model in which the statements are grouped into subprograms.

    - Object-Oriented Paradigm
It is one of a world of interacting objects. Each object has responsibility for its own actions.

    - Declarative Paradigm
It is a model in which the results are described, but the steps to accomplish the results are not stated.
There are two basic models within this paradigm: function and logic.

    - Functional Model
It is based on the concept of the function. Computation is expressed in terms of the evaluation of functions; the solution to problem is expressed in terms of function calls.
The basic mechanism is the evaluation of functions and there are no variables and no assignment statements.
Lisp, Scheme, ML.
lambda is the word for defining a function.

    - Logic Programming
It is based on the principles of symbolic logic. This model comprises a set of facts about objects and a set of rules about the relationships among the objects.
Prolog.

Both Lisp and Prolog are used in artificial intelligence applicants.

9.4 Functionality in High-Level Languages

    - Boolean Expressions
These statements are called assertions or conditions  =>  boolean expressions
It is a sequence of identifiers, separated by compatible operators, that evaluates to either true or false.

6 relation operation: less then (<), less than or equal (<=), greater than (>), greater than or equal (>=), not equal (!=, <>, /=), equal (=, ==).

3 Boolean operators: AND OR NOT

    - Data Typing
The requirement that only a value of the proper type can be stored into a variable.

Data type - a description of the set of values and the basic set of operations that can be applied to values of the type.

4 distinc data types built into the languages: integer numbers, real numbers, characters, and Boolean.

Integer: different sizes, min and max values, operations: +, -, *, /, modulus operator (%).
Real: smaller to largest with given precision.
Character: ASCII character, Unicode character.
Boolean: true, false

Composite data types: String (a sequence of characters)

    - Declarations
A declaration is a language statement that associates an identifier with a variable, an action, ...

    - Input/Output Structures
Read uses for getting a value from outside the program and sorting it into a variable inside the program.
Write/Print use for displaying a message for the human to see.

High-level languages view text data as a stream of characters divided into lines.
cin, cout  / scanf()/printf() / input()/print()

    - Control Structures
repetition, selection, and subprogram  = determine the order in which other instructions in a program are executed.

We use indention to group statements within the body of an if / while statements in Python.
We use braces ({}) in Java/C/C++.

    - Nested Logic
The statements to be executed or skipped in any control statement can be simple statements or blocks.

    - Asynchronous Processing
Asynchronous processing is also called event-driven processing.

9.5 Functionality of Object-Oriented Languages
Basic construct in an object-oriented languages is the class.
The essential ingredients:
    encapsulation, inheritance, polymorphism.




