The Stories about Sherlock Holmes

The Adventure of the Speckled Band

 1. Helen Stoner Tells Her Story

I studied the methods of my friend Sherlock Holmes during the last eight years and I was sure that he did his work for the love of his art - not for the love of money. Many cases were tragic, some were comic, some mysterious, but they were never ordinary. Of all cases this one was the most exciting.
It all began in those early days when I was living at Sherlock Holmes's flat in Baker Street in London.
It was early in April in the year 1883. I woke one morning and saw Sherlock Holmes standing, fully dressed, near my bed. He was a late riser and as the clock showed me that it was only a quarter past seven, I looked at him in some surprise.
"Very sorry to wake you up, Watson," said he.
"What is it ... a fire?"
"No, a client. I think this young lady has arrived too excited. She is waiting now in the sitting room. Now, when young ladies walk around London at this early hour, and knock sleepy people up out of their beds, I think that it is something very important which they have to tell. It is going to be a very interesting case! Would you like to come and listen to what she has got to say."
"My dear friend, I'll be down in a minute."
When I came into the sitting room, I saw a lady dressed in black standing by the window.
"Good-morning, madam," said Holmes. "My name is Sherlock Holmes. This is my true friend Dr. Watson. So, you can speak as freely as before myself I can see that you are very cold. Move close to the fire and I'll ask to bring you a cup of hot coffee."
"I am not cold," said the woman in a low voice.
"What, then?"
"I'm afraid! Afraid to death!" She looked very tired and unhappy, and her face was very white. She had frightened eyes, like those of some hunted animal. She was a young woman of about thirty, but her hair was grey.
"Don't be afraid of anything in my house, just tell us everything you have got," said Sherlock Holmes. "We will help you. You have come by train this morning, I see."
"You know me, then?"
"No, but I noticed the second half of a return ticket in your hand when you took off your glove. You started your way early in the morning."
The lady looked at Holmes surprisingly.
"Whatever your reasons are, you are absolutely right," said she. "I started from home before six. Sir, I shall go mad if I get no help. I have heard of you, Mr. Holmes from Mrs. Farintosh, whom you helped a lot. It was from her that I had your address. Oh, sir, do you not think that you could help me, too? Can you explain some mysteries to me? Now I can't pay you but in a month or six weeks I shall be married, and will have my own money."
Holmes turned to his desk and opened it and looked through some papers.
"Farintosh," said he. "Ah yes, I can remember her case. I think it was before your time, Watson. I can only say, madam, that I shall be happy to do my beat to help you as I did to your friend. As for paying, you can do at the time, which you choose. And now tell us your story."
"Oh dear!" answered our visitor, "the very horror of my situation is that I have no facts to tell you. Nothing that will be of any help to you. I'm afraid you can think that I am just a nervous woman... But I have heard, Mr. Holmes, that you can see deeply into the human heart. You may advise me how to walk among the dangers around me."
"Tell me all you know, madam."
"My name is Helen Stoner, and I am living with my stepfather. He is the last member of one of the oldest Saxon families in England, the Roylotts of Stoke Moran."
"I know the name," said Holmes.
"The family was one of the richest in England but in the last century the family lost all their power. When my stepfather was born they had no money. Now nothing is left, only a small piece of land and an old house. When my stepfather was young he became a doctor, because he had to work. He went to India and worked there successfully. But one day a tragedy happened. Somebody got into his house and stole many things. My stepfather got so angry that beat his servant to death. My stepfather spent many years in prison and returned to England an unhappy and angry man. When Dr. Roylott was in India he married my mother, Mrs. Stoner. Her husband my father was dead at that time. My sister Julia and I were twins, and we were only two years old at the time of my mother's second marriage. After our return to England my mother died and left all her money to Dr. Roylott, our stepfather. He decided no to work any more and took us to live with him in the old country house. My mother ordered that when we got married he should give each of us money each year.
"But a terrible change came over our stepfather about this time. Instead of making friends with our neighbours, he shut himself up in his house and seldom came out. But when he did, he became very angry and violent. At last he became the terror of the village.
"Now he is more and more violent, and sometimes has fights with the people from the village. Everybody is afraid of him now, and they run away when they see him. His only friends are gypsies. My stepfather loves them and they can do whatever they want in our house.
"And he also loves Indian animals. His friend sends them to him from India. Now he has a cheetah and a baboon, which walk freely in our garden.
"You can imagine from what I say that my poor sister Julia and I had very unhappy lives. No servant stayed with us, and for a long time we did all the work in the house. She was thirty at the time of her death, and her hair was already grey, like my hair now."
"Your sister is dead, then?"
"She died two years ago, and that's why I'm here. Two years ago at Christmas time we were staying at our aunt's in London. There Julia met a young man who asked to marry her. My stepfather agreed. But two weeks before the wedding day a tragedy happened."
Sherlock Holmes was listening with his eyes closed but now he opened them and looked at Helen.
"Please tell us everything about her death in detail," said he.
"It is easy for me to do so, because I can remember it all very well. It was a terrible time. But first I'd like to tell you about our house. You can live only in one part of it, because it is very old and not comfortable. Our bedrooms are on the ground floor, the first is Dr. Roylott's bedroom, the second is my sister's, and the third is my bedroom. The rooms all have windows into the garden and their doors open into the corridor. Do you understand me?"
"Yes, madam."
"That terrible night Dr. Roylott went to his room early. Later we went to our bedrooms but suddenly my sister came into my room. She couldn't get to sleep because of the smell of the strong Indian cigars. My stepfather liked to smoke them. At eleven o'clock she left me, but she stopped at the door and looked back.
' Tell me, Helen,' said she, ' have you ever heard a whistle at night?"
' Never,' said I.
' It is strange, but about three in the morning, I hear a low whistle. I am a light sleeper and it always wakes me. I cannot tell where it comes from, perhaps from the next room.'
' Gypsies ?'
She smiled back at me, closed my door, and a few moments later I heard her key turn in the lock."
"Why did you lock your doors at night?" said Holmes.
"Our stepfather kept a cheetah and a baboon. We were afraid of them and of gypsies."
"Please go on."
"I could not sleep that night. It was a wild stormy night. The wind was blowing hard. Suddenly I heard the wild scream of a terrified woman. I knew that it was my sister's voice. I
jumped from my bed, and ran into the corridor. When I opened my door I think I heard a low whistle, and a few moments later the sound of falling metal.
"I ran to my sister's door. By the light of the corridor lamp I saw my sister appear, her face white with terror, her hands asking for help. I ran to her, but at that moment she fell to the ground. She was in terrible pain. She was crying: ' Help me, Helen! I am dying!' and then ' Oh, my God! Helen! It was the band! The speckled band!' She wanted to say something else, but she couldn't, only pointed her finger to the stepfathers room. I called loudly for my stepfather, and he ran out of his room to help her. But we could do nothing. Such was the terrible end of my dear sister."
"One moment," said Holmes, "are you sure about this whistle and metallic sound?"
"I think I heard it, but the night was so stormy... Perhaps I made a mistake."
"Was your sister dressed?"
"No, she was in her night dress. In her right hand there was found a match."
"It means that she tried to look about her. That is important. And what did the police find?"
"They tried but they couldn't understand why my sister had died. Nobody could get into her room and they didn't find any poison in her body."
"What do you think this unfortunate lady died of, then?"
"I think that she died of fear and nervous shock. What frightened her? I cannot imagine."
"Were there gypsies in the house?"
"Yes, they are always there."
"Ah, and what is ' speckled band '?"
-"Perhaps she meant some band of people gypsies. Perhaps she was talking about those bands which gypsies wear round their heads."
Holmes shook his head.
"Please go on your story."
"That was two years ago and I have been very lonely without my sister. A month ago a dear friend asked me to marry me. We are going to get married soon. Two days ago my stepfather asked me to move into my sister's room. He wanted to mend the bedroom wall and I had to sleep in my sister's bed.
"Can you imagine my terror when last night I suddenly heard the same low whistle? I jumped up and lit the lamp, but saw nothing. I was too afraid to go to bed again, so I dressed and ran out of the house and came to London to ask for your help."
"This is a very deep business.'" said my friend. "But we must act as quickly as possible. Can we look at all these rooms if we go to your house today, Miss Stoner? But your stepfather must not know."
"He is meeting some important people in London today, so he is out all day long."
"Excellent. You will come with me, Watson?"
"Thank you, sir."

 2. Sherlock Holmes and Dr. Watson Visit the House

"And what do you think of it all, Watson?" asked Sherlock Holmes when Helen Stoner left the room.
"Dark, mysterious and frightening. What about low whistles and strange words of her dying sister?"
"If you think about the whistles at night and a band of gypsies who are friends to her stepfather, you will understand that we have every reason to believe that the doctor doesn't want his stepdaughter's marriage."
"But what, then, did the gypsies do?"
"I don't know. We cannot give answer to many questions, that's why we are going to visit the doctor's house today. What's that noise?"
Our door suddenly opened and a tall man came in.
"Which of you is Holmes?" he asked.
"My name, sir," said my friend.
"I am Dr. Grimesby Roylott of Stoke Moran."
"Will you sit down, Doctor?" said Holmes.
"I know that my stepdaughter has been here. What did she tell you?"
"It is a little cold for the time of the year," said Holmes.
"What did she tell you?" cried the doctor angrily.
"The flowers are starting to grow," said Holmes.
"I know you, Holmes trouble maker! You try to look like a policeman and to work like a policeman, but you are just a trouble maker!"
My friend smiled.
"When you go out close the door, there is a strong wind outdoors."
"I will go when I have finished. It's better for you to leave me alone. Remember I am a dangerous man!"
He left the room quickly.
"We mustn't be late. Now I see that Miss Stoner is in great danger. And now, Watson, we shall have breakfast, and then I try to find out more about this man."
It was nearly one o'clock when Sherlock Holmes came back.
"I have seen the will of his wife," said he. "Our dangerous friend needs the girls' money, because he has only 750 pounds a year from his dead wife. If the girls marry, they will ask for their money and he will have too little of it. And now the doctor knows that we are interested in him. So if you are ready, we are leaving for Stoke Moran. Don't forget to take your gun with you, Watson. And the toothbrush we are going to stay there for the night."
When we got to Stoke Moran, Miss Stoner met us and showed the house. The building was made of grey stone. One part of it was nearly ruined but the other was much better. Helen showed us the three bedrooms.
"Everything is OK with your bedroom, Miss Stoner! It doesn't need any mending, as I can see," said Holmes.
"I think my stepfather wanted me to move into my sister's room. It was his plan," said Helen.
"It sounds possible," said Holmes and looked at the windows carefully. "When you lock the windows, can anybody get inside from the garden?"
"No."
Holmes went into Julia's room and watched it. There was a table, two chairs and a bed there.
"Why is that bell rope there, over the bed?" he asked.
"It goes into the servant's room. They put it here two years ago. But we never had servants here."
Holmes came up to the bell rope and pulled it.
"But it doesn't work! This is very interesting! Look There is an air vent near it! Isn't it strange too? Why have you got an air vent that goes into another room, and not outside, Miss Stoner?"
"Very strange!" said Helen. "The bell rope that doesn't ring, and a ventilator that does not ventilate."
We all went to the doctor's bedroom. There was not much furniture there. But Holmes looked at it very carefully. There was a bed, a round table, a comfortable armchair, and a big metal safe near the wall.
"What's in here?" he asked, touching the safe.
"My stepfather's business papers."
"Oh! you have seen inside, then?"
"Only once, some years ago. I remember that it was full of papers."
"There isn't a cat in it, for example?"
"No. What a strange idea!"
"Well, look at this!" He pointed at a small plate of milk on the top of the safe.
"No; we don't keep a cat. But there is a cheetah and a baboon but they don't drink from such small plates."
"Now, Miss Stoner," said Holmes. "I see that your life is in danger. It is very important and you must follow my advice. Tonight my friend Watson and I spend the night in your room."
Both Miss Stoner and I looked at him in surprise.
"Yes, we must. Let me explain. We will take a room in the village hotel. When your stepfather goes to bed, turn on the lamp in your sister's room as a signal to us. Then go to your bedroom and don't forget to leave the windows open. We'll get into your sisters' room and wait for the sound of falling metal and the whistle. I think we won't wait for a long time."
"Oh, Mr. Holmes, now I see that you know how my sister died. Tell me how it happened. Do you know?"
"I must get some more information but I think that I know.
Now be brave and good-bye. Remember, if you do what I tell you, Miss Stoner, you will be out of danger for ever."
Holmes and I went to the village and took a room in a small hotel. From our window we could see the house well. Holmes said to me:
"It is going to be dangerous there, Watson. Doctor is an angry and clever man."
"My dear friend, if I can be of help, I will come with you."
"Thank you, Watson. I'll really need your help. Did you see the bell rope and air vent in the room? It means there is a hole between two bedrooms. I knew about it from the very beginning. Do you remember Helen told us about the smell of Dr. Roylott's cigarettes?"
"There is an air vent between the bedrooms, there is a bell rope that doesn't work and there is a lady who is in danger. I still cannot see..."
"What is more, the lady's bed is fixed to the floor. It stays there, near the bell rope and under the air vent."
"Holmes!" I cried. "I begin to understand! We must stop him!"

 3. Terrible Death

All was dark at the house. We were watching the windows and then suddenly we saw bright light.
"That is our signal," said Holmes. "It comes from the right window."
We left the hotel and went to the house. We walked quietly through the garden, and climbed into the bedroom through the open window.
When we were in Julia's bedroom, we closed the window and looked around the room. It looked just the same as before. Holmes said in a low voice, "We must make no noise." I showed him that I had heard. "We must sit without a light. He could see it through the air vent."
I took out my pistol and put it on the corner of the table.
Holmes brought a long thin stick with him and put it near him with a box of matches. Then he turned off the light and we were left in darkness².
How shall I ever forget those terrible hours?
I could not hear anything but I knew Holmes sat near, with open eyes, listening and watching.
From outside we heard the cry of a night bird, and far away the church clock striking every quarter of an hour. Twelve o'clock - one two and three, and still we sat waiting silently.
Suddenly there was a light showing through the air vent. There was a sound of movement, and then another very small sound. Holmes jumped up from the bed, struck a match, and beat wildly with his stick.
"You see it, Watson?" he called. "You see it?"
I saw nothing. I heard a low whistle. But I could see that Holmes's face was white with terror.
I came up to the lamp and turned it on. Holmes looked at the air vent. Suddenly there was the most terrible cry I have ever heard.
Then the house was silent again.
"What does it mean?" I asked.
"It means that it is all over," Holmes answered. "Take your pistol. We must go into Dr Roylott's room."
We took the lamp and came into the doctor's room. There was a lamp on the table. The iron safe was open. The doctor sat on a chair. His head was up and his eyes were fixed on the air vent. Round his head there was a yellow band with brown spots. He did not move as we came in the room. He was dead.
"The band! The speckled band!" said Holmes in a low voice. I took a step forward. At once the band moved, and I saw it was a snake.
The snake moved and began to turn its head.
"It's a very dangerous Indian snake. Its poison can kill anybody. Roylott died quickly. We must put the snake back in the safe." Very, very carefully, Holmes took the snake and threw it into the metal safe and quickly closed it.
These are the true facts of the death of Dr. Grimesby Roylott.
We went to Miss Stoner and told her everything. There was no danger for her but the next day she left for her aunt who
lived in Harrow. We called the police and they decided that the doctor met his death playing with his dangerous pet.
On our way back to London, I asked Holmes how he learned about the snake.
"At first, Watson, I thought that it was gypsies. But the danger couldn't get into the room through the window or the
door. So I understood that the danger was in the ventilator and the bell rope something came through the ventilator and down the rope. When I saw the milk I understood that it was a snake. It was easy for the doctor to get Indian animals. Of course, he knew that it was very difficult to find this snake's poison in the dead body. This clever and cruel man used his Indian knowledge to kill. He taught the snake to obey the whistle and return to its master. It was easy to put it through the ventilator. It climbed down the rope on the bed, and it bit the person there as soon as he or she moved. He kept the snake in the metal safe. The sound of falling metal was the door of the safe. Perhaps the snake came through the air vent many times before it killed Julia. Helen, too, nearly dies because of this snake. But tonight when I beat the snake with his stick, it got afraid and went back through the air vent. So I think I killed the doctor, but I can't say that I am sorry about it!" said Holmes.

