Daniel Defoe
Robbinson Crusoe

Chapter 2.
Slavery and Escape

I went on board a vessel bound to the coast of Africa, or in other words it was
called a voyage to Guinea. This time I neither had any business in the ship nor
learned to do anything. In all my adventures, this was only voyage which was
successful.

First of all, I got acquainted with the captain of the ship. I told him that I
had a great desire to see the world. The captain liked my idea and suggested 
going on the voyage with him without paying for it. That was a great suggestion!

Soon, the captain and I became good friends. Thanks to that friendship I learned
mathematics, the rules of navigation, and understood some things that were needed
for a sailor. The captain took delight in instructing me and I took delight in
learning. In a word, this voyage made me both a sailor and a merchant, and I
earned a good sum of money.

Yet, even in this voyage I had my misfortunes too. I was continually sick
because of terrible heat. And the other bad thing happened to may friend.
He died soon after his arrival.

Nevertheless, I decided to go the same voyage in the same vessel again. I got
the command of the ship. But unfortunately, that was the unhappiest voyage
that man had ever made. On the way to the Canary Islands, not far from 
African shore, our ship was chased by a Turkish rover of Sallee.
After a few hours the pirates caught up with us. We tried to fight and
defend ourselves. But the strengths were uneven. Three of our men were killed
and eight wounded. We all were taken prisoners into Sallee, a port belonging
to the Moors.

I was kept by the captain as his personal prize. I was young and active, and
I was fit for his business. So, from a successful merchant I turned into
a miserable slave.

My new patron, or master, took me to his house. I took care of his garden and
did all household duties. Later on, he asked me to take care of his ship too.
So, I hoped that some day I could go to sea and become free.

Two years passed without any changes. I took care of the house and performed all
my duties. Sometimes I also went fishing with the master.

Thought one day, my patron asked me to go fishing and catch some fish for dinner.
He himself stayed at home, thus a small ship was at my command. There were two
other men on board with me. But I prepared myself not for fishing, but for
a voyage.

After we had fished for some time and caught nothing I said to the Moor,
"This will not do; we must sail further off."
He, thinking no harm, agreed. Suddenly, I tossed him overboard into the sea. Then,
I turned to the boy, whom they called Xury, and said to him, "Xury, if you are
faithful to me, I'll make you a great man - you will go all over the world with
me." And the boy agreed.

We sailed for five days. Nobody was chasing us but I didn't know where we were.
I had no instruments for taking an observation to see what latitude we were in.
But the best of my calculation, we were somewhere near Morocco. Once or twice in
the daytime I thought I saw the Pico of Tenerife. These lands were full of tigers,
lions, leopards, and other furious creatures, so no humans lived there.

Suddenly, when it was quite dark, we heard dreadful noises of barking, roaring,
and howling wild creatures. Xury was dreadfully frightened, and so was I.
But when the morning came, we had to go on shore and find some fresh water.

We found the fresh water without any difficulties. But on our way back to the
ship Xury saw a dreadful monster. It was sleeping. I looked where he pointed to
and saw a great lion lying in the shade of a tree. I took our biggest gun and shot
him in the head.

The lion was good for nothing to us, except for his skin which served me to lie
upon.

