Daniel Defoe
Robbinson Crusoe

Chapter 4.
First Weeks On the Island

It was a good day on the island. The weather was clear and the storm abated.
I was exhausted and hungry, so I decided to look for some food. I walked around
and saw the ship, which wasn't broken to pieces by the storm, as I had supposed.
I thought that there might be some necessary things for my use, so I had to get
there somehow.

The sea was very calm, so I swam near a quarter of a mile to the ship and with
the help of a rope I climbed aboard. At first, I found that all the ship's
provisions were dry and untouched by the water. So, I filled my pockets with
biscuits and bags with bread, rice, Dutch cheeses and five pieces of dried
goat's flesh. Then I made something like a raft from two or three large spars of
wood, tying each with a rope and nailing some boards upon it, to carry my stuff.
I also took a box of tools, some guns, and two barrels of powder. I got to the
shore without any serious problems.

Next, I had to view the place I was in. There was a high hill not far from me.
I took some guns with me and travelled to discover the top of that hill, from
which I saw that I was on an island. Fortunately, I didn't see any wild animals.

The day was almost over but I knew neither what to do nor where to have a rest.
I was afraid to lie down on the ground, so I made up my mind to make a kind of
hut for that night's sleep.

I also needed a place to hide all my goods. So I made a little tent and brought
everything that could be spoiled either by rain or sun into that tent.

From that day on I used to go on board the ship looking for something useful
and bringing it home.

I had been then for thirteen days shore, and I had been eleven times on boards,
so I brought away one pair of large scissors, a dozen of good knives and forks,
about thirty-six pounds value in money - some European coins, some Brazilian,
some pockets of gold and silver. I was really glad to have all those things.

Once, on my way back to land, a strong wind arose. I had hardly reached the shore
because the wind became so strong that the waves covered the ship. My tent was
upon a low wet ground near the sea, which wasn't quite safe. So I decided to find
a better place for my living. I had many thoughts of the way how to do that and
what kind of dwelling to make - whether I should make a cave in the earth, or
a tent upon the earth. On one side of the rock, there was a place looking like
an entrance to a cave.

It was possible to get into the cave be a short ladder, which I lifted when I
was inside. I built a fence, do I felt completely safe, as I thought, from all
the world, and consequently I slept secure at night. Neither man nor animal
could get through that fence. I also made a large tend, which should protect my riches, all my provisions and ammunition to my new home.

I worked very hard to make my new home beautiful, comfortable and safe. It took me more than three months to do it.

While I was working in a cave, a terrible storm came up from a thick, dark cloud and suddenly there was a flash of lighting, and after that a great clap of thunder. I thought, "Oh, my powder!" My heart sank when I thought that all my powder might be destroyed! Without it I wouldn't be able to protect myself and to get any food.

When the storm was over, I started making bags and boxes to separate the powder, hoping that they might not all fire at once. So I placed it in my new cave, which I called my kitchen.

On the days free of making my dwelling place, I walked around searching for some food. I discovered that there were goats in the island. I was so glad of it! But it was the most difficult thing in the world to catch them as they were very swift. One day I watched them, thinking that I could shoot one, but then they saw me they ran away at the same moment. Once, they were in a valley, so they couldn't see me. That was a good chance to fire at them. I shot an old goat. But I didn't notice a small goat by her side. It grieved for its dead mother. I picked up the old goat and carried it home over my shoulder. But the kid was following me all the way. I thought I would domesticate it, but it didn't eat anything, so I had to kill it too. That was better option than to keep it starving to death.

After I had been on the island for about ten or twelve days, I realized that I had to make a kind of a calendar to follow the time. To prevent this, I cut with my knife upon a large post - "I came on shore here on the 30-th september 1659." Then, every day I cut a notch. Every seventh notch was longer than the others. And every first day of the month had the longest notch. Thus I kept my calendar, weekly, monthly, and yearly reckoning of time.

And I had to remember one more thing: on board the ship, we had a dog and two cats. I brought them home. As I also found pens, ink and paper on board the ship, I decided to write down my thoughts. It was a hard time on the island: I was alone, no family, no friends, and no business. I remembered my father's words that I could stay at home and live calm and peaceful life. But on the other hand, I had to be thankful for being alive. So, after some time of thinking the following thoughts were written on a sheet of paper: Evil - 1) I am thrown on a horrible island, with no hope to be saved; 2) I am alone and feel miserable; 3) I have no clothes; 4) I am without any defence, I have nothing to protest myself from wild animals; 5) I have no one to speak to; Good - 1) But I am alive; 2) But I am not starving; 3) But I am in hot climate, where there is no need of it; 4) But I am on an island where I see no wild beasts; 5) But God sent the ship near enough to the shore, that I could get many necessary things. And I have a dog and cats for my company.

This sheet of paper made me think no matter how hard my life seemed, there always was something positive to be thankful for.

So, I left my pessimistic thoughts and continued working. I needed many things in the house. Thus, I made a table and chair, and some large shelves out of the planks of the ship. It was a great pleasure for me to see all my goods in such an order!

From that moment I began to keep a journal of every day's employment.


