The Lost World

Chapter One
Try Your Luck With Professor Challenger 


How beautiful Gladys was! I loved her but we were only friends. That day I decided that the time had come!! Would she say "yes" or "no" to me? When we were in her sitting room near the warm fire in her house, she looked at me with her beautiful dark eyes and she said: "I think you are going to ask me to be your wife, Ned. Don't do it!"
"But why can't you love me, Gladys? Is it my face, my figure, or what?"
"No it isn't that," she said at last. "I'm in love with somebody else. It's nobody, only an ideal."
"What is your ideal?"
"Oh, he is much like you. Well, he is a strong man, a man who can look Death in the face."
"We can't all be great heroes," said I, "besides, I have never had the chance. But I'll try to take it."
"You know, chances are all around you."
"Give me a chance! I'll do something in the world! And if I do..."
"Not another word, sir! Some day you will win your place in the world. Then we shall talk it over again."
I left her with my heart full of love. I wanted to find some heroic deed. When I came to my work (I worked at the Daily Gazette as a reporter), I asked Mr. McArdle, my boss, to send me to any dangerous place. I wanted it to be the most difficult one.
"Dear Mr. Malone, I'm afraid the time has gone. There's no place for romance anywhere. But wait a little bit!" he said, with a smile on his face. "What about a modern Munchausen? I'm talking about Professor Challenger. Some people say he is a liar! You can have a chance to find out."
"Challenger!" I cried. "Professor Challenger, the famous zoologist! But I don't understand why I must interview this gentleman. What has he done?"
"He went to South America on expedition two years ago and came back last year. Then he began to talk about his adventures but he didn't tell everything. He didn't tell in detail. Something wonderful happened or the man is a champion liar. He has only got some bad photos. He gets so aggressive that he attacks anyone who asks questions. He often sends reporters down the stairs. That's your man, Mr. Malone. Now, off you go! And good luck!"
I left the office and went to have a drink in the cafe. There I met my friend Tarp Henry, a microbiologist. He was surprised: "Challenger? The man who came with some silly stories from South America? As far as I can remember, he told about
some strange animals. He gave an interview, and there was such a scandal! Now nobody believes him."
"Why?"
"Well, it is his impossible character. Well, besides, I have heard something of Challenger. They say he is a man nobody can ignore."
"What do you mean?"
"Would you like to come to my office? I've got something interesting to tell you."
Half an hour later I was in his office with a thick book in front of me. It was the Professor's lecture written for a scientific conference. I couldn't understand a word but it was clear that the Professor spoke to the audience in an unfriendly way. Then I had an idea to write a letter to the Professor and send it with my friend's address on it. When the letter was finished, I read it to Tarp. The letter said that a poor student of Nature (that was me!) asked for an interview with the Professor. He wanted to discuss some new scientific problems.
"Well, not bad, really. But what are you going to do then?" asked Tarp.
"To get there. When I am in his room..."
"When you are in his room, you need a gun or something like that to save your life. Remember, he is a dangerous character, everyone hates him."
On Wednesday I found a letter waiting for me. I took a taxi and in twenty minutes I was in front of a nice big house. An old servant opened the door and I came into the house. In the corridor I met a small bright woman with dark Italian eyes.
"One moment," she said. "May I ask a question? Have you met my husband before?"
"No, madam."
"Then I must tell you that he is an impossible person. Get quickly out of the room if he gets aggressive. I hope you are not going to speak about his expedition to South America?"
I could not lie to a lady.
"Oh, dear!" It is very dangerous. You won't believe a word he says, I'm sure. But don't tell him so, because it makes him very angry². Remember he believes it himself. If you find him dangerous really dangerous - ring the bell!"
With these words the lady left me and the servant led me to Professor's study.
He was sitting at a large table, covered with books, maps, and diagrams. His head was very big, he had large black - blue beard, and his eyes were blue - grey under great black eyebrows, very clear and very critical. Besides, I noticed two big hands covered with long black hair.
"Well?" he said in a roaring voice, "What now?"
"Thank you for the chance to meet you, sir," I said quietly.
"Oh, you are the young person who agrees with my ideas, what is more, you've got something of great interest to tell me... That is a great help to me, isn't it? So, what would you like to tell me?"
"I am a poor student," I said, with a silly smile. "At the same time, I think that you were a little unfriendly to some other scientists."
"Unfriendly? Well, I think you know," he said, "that the cranial index is a constant factor?"
"Naturally," said I.
"And that telegony is still sub judice?"
"Certainly, sir."
"And that the germ plasma is different from the partheno-genetic egg?" That the cranial index is a constant factor?"
"Why, surely!" I cried,
"But what does that prove?" he asked, in a gentle voice.
"Ah, what indeed?" I murmured. "What does it prove?"
"Shall I tell you?" he said in a low voice.
"If you please, sir."
"It proves," he roared with a sudden anger, "that you are the journalist, who has no more science in his head than he has truth in his reports!"
He jumped to his feet.
"Nonsense!" he cried. "That's what I told you, sir. Scientific nonsense! Did you think you could play a trick on me¹? You played a dangerous game, and I think that you have lost it."
"Look here, sir," I said, "you can be as angry as you like. But you will not attack me."
"Will I not?"" He was slowly coming to me. "I have thrown
some journalists out of the house. You will be the fourth. Get
out of here!"
"Don't be such a fool, Professor!" I cried.
That moment he jumped at me. The door was opened and I was lucky not to go through it. We went to the front steps³.
"Enough?" he asked when we went outside.
We shouted at each other and used the worst words we knew.
Soon a policeman came to us.
"What's all this?" asked the policeman.
"This man attacked me," said I.
"Did you attack him?"
The Professor said nothing.
"It's not the first time," said the policeman. "You were in trouble last month for the same thing. Do you give him in charge, sir?"
"No," said I, "I do not because he gave me a warning."
The policeman closed his notebook and with the words of good-bye left.
The Professor looked at me, and there was something humorous in his eyes.
"Come in!" said he. "I've not done with you yet."

Chapter Two
It's Just the Very Biggest Thing in the World

"Now, Mr. Malone," he continued, "you are at my house... Your answer to the policeman was a surprise to me. It was so unnatural to a person of your profession. I really felt some good feeling on you. So I decided to continue our talk."
He turned away and started looking for something among papers on his desk. Then I saw a very old sketch book in his hand.
"Now, I am going to tell you what happened to me in South America," said he. "You must stay quiet and listen carefully.
And remember it is our private talk. Is that clear?"
"I can see it and I have no choice."
"Well, you know that two years ago I visited South America. The banks of the Amazon are unknown land, and I had to
explore them and examine its fauna. On my way back I spent a night at a small Indian village. The native people were Cucama Indians, very friendly indeed. They were really glad to see me back because I had helped some ill natives successfully. They explained to me that somebody needed my help. I followed the chief to one of his houses. When I came in, I found that the poor man was dead. It surprised me a lot that he was a white man, not an Indian. Some days ago he came to their village. He was dying of hunger. The man's bag was near him, and I examined it. His name was written on it - Maple White, Lake Avenue, Detroit. The man was an artist. There were some pictures, a paint box, a box of coloured chalks, some brushes, that big bone, which you can see on my desk and a gun. Suddenly I saw something in his pocket. It was this sketch book. I give it to you, and I ask you to examine it carefully."
I opened the book. On the first page there was a picture of a very fat man in a green jacket. Then small sketches of Indians and animals followed. I looked at Professor in surprise.
"Try the next page," said he.
It was a full page sketch. I could see high hills covered with light green trees. Above the hills there were dark red cliffs. They looked like an unbroken wall. Near the cliffs there was a pyramidal rock. The was a great tree in its top. Above it all blue tropical sky.
"It looks nice," I said "but I can't say it is wonderful." "Wonderful!" he cried. "Nobody on the earth has ever seen
such a place. Now the next."
I turned the page, and gave a cry of surprise. There was a full page picture of the most extraordinary creature. It was a wild dream! The head was like that of a bird, the body that of a large lizard. The tail was covered with sharp spikes. In front of this creature there was a little man who stood looking at it.
"Well, what do you think of that?" cried the Professor.
"It is monstrous!"
"But why did the artist draw such an animal?"
"Alcohol, I think."
"Oh, any more ideas?"
"Well, sir, what do you think of it?"
"The creature exists. The artist saw it with his own eyes."
"It is so difficult to agree with you but I think you are right." I said. I remembered our fight quite well. "However, this little man puzzles me."
"Look here!" he cried and pointed at the picture with a great hairy finger. "You see that plant behind the animal? It's not a small flower. It is a huge palm tree. Don't you see that the artist sketched the man to give a scale¹?"
"Oh dear!" I cried. "Then you think the monster was real..."
I turned over the pages but there was nothing more in the book.
"But we have got only one sketch by an American artist. And he is dead now. It proves nothing, does it?"
For an answer the Professor took a book from a shelf.
"There is a picture of great interest in this book. Ah, yes, here it is! Can you see the words: ' The Jurassic Dinosaur Stegosaurus. His leg is twice as tall as a man.' Well, what do you think of that?"
He gave me the book. The animal looked very much alike the monster from the sketch book.
"Maybe, the American saw the same picture and carried it in his memory. Later, it appeared to him when he was ill."
"Very good," said the Professor, "I will now ask you to look at this bone."
He showed me the bone from the dead man's bag. It was about six inches long and thicker than my finger.
"Whose bone is it?" asked the Professor.
I looked at it carefully.
"You don't need to be ashamed², young man. I think there is no zoologist who could name it," the Professor showed me a very little bone. "Look, this human bone looks the same but it is much smaller. Does it give you any idea of the size of the creature?"
"An elephant..."
"Don't! Don't talk of elephants in South America... Believe me, this is not a bone of a tapir or of any other living creature. It belongs to a very large, a very strong animal. You don't believe it, do you?"
"I am just very interested."
"Let's go on with my story. You see, I couldn't leave that land without getting an answer. I knew where the American came from. In Indian legends I found some stories of a strange land. You have heard of Curupuri? It is a terrible creature from the woods. Nobody can describe it, but it means terror along the Amazon. Now all natives name the same place where Curupuri lives. It was the same place from which the American came. I had to find out what it was."
"What did you do?"
"First, the natives didn't want to talk to me about that strange land. But with the help of presents, I got two natives to help me. After many adventures, we came to an unknown land. Would you look at this?"
He gave me a photograph.
"It's not good because on our way back the boat was turned. This is the only photo I have got now."
The photo was very bad and off coloured. I could hardly see anything in it. It was a dull grey landscape with a long and high wall of cliffs.
"I believe it is the same place as the picture from the sketch book," I said.
"It is the same place," the Professor answered. "Now look here."
The next photo was very bad too. I could see a thin tall rock with a tall tree on its top. It was like the picture from the sketch book.
"Now, will you please look at the rock more carefully? Do you see anything there, on the tree?"
"A large bird with a very big beak. Is it a pelican?"
"It is not a pelican. It's not a bird. You know, I shot that creature."
"You have it, then?"
"I had it. It was lost when our boat turned over. But I have got the part of its wing. Have a look!"
It looked like the wing of a large bat with a membrane.
"A monstrous bat!" I cried.
"Nothing of the sort," said the Professor. "The bats have three very long fingers with membranes between. Now, there is only one membrane here. So it cannot be a bat. But what is it?"
"I really do not know," said I.
"Here," he said and pointed to the picture of a flying monster, "is a nice picture of the pterodactyl, a flying reptile of the Jurassic period. Compare it with the picture in your hand."
The sketch, the photographs, the story, and now the bone.
"It's just the very biggest thing that I ever heard of!" cried I. "You are a Columbus of science who has discovered a lost world. And then, sir, what did you do next?"
"It was the wet season, Mr. Malone, and I couldn't stay there longer. I explored some low parts of this cliff, but I couldn't find any way up. But I climbed the pyramidal rock. From its top I had a better idea of the plateau. It was very large; I saw no end of it. Below, it is a jungle region, full of snakes and insects."
"Did you see any other living creatures?"
"No, sir, I did not; but at night we heard some very strange noises."
"But the creature that the American drew? How do you explain it?"
"We decided that he climbed the pyramidal rock and watched it from there. I am sure that it must be a very difficult way up. That's why we can't see the monsters walking around the country."
"But how did they come up there?"
"I'll try to explain it to you. South America is a granite continent. In this place, long time ago, there was a great, sudden volcanic upheaval. A large territory went up with all living creatures. What is the result? The laws of Nature stopped working. Those creatures still live there."
"You are absolutely right. Did you tell about your discovery to the scientists?"
"I did," said the Professor, "And their stupidity shocked me. I am not going to prove anything. When men like you came to me I couldn't meet them with a smile. I'm afraid you have noticed it," he smiled and continued.
"You know, tonight I'm going to try again. Mr. Waldron, a naturalist, will lecture at the Zoological Institute. They invited me to say some words of thanks to him. I hope I will be able to give a few ideas. Maybe, they would like to discuss them."
When I left Professor Challenger, I believed all his words. Besides, I knew I could make a sensational report for my newspaper.
When I arrived at the Institute, I could see a lot of people in the Great Hall. There were white bearded professors, medical students and just ordinary people among them. It was rather noisy there, but what a roar of welcome broke when Professor Challenger appeared!
Then Mr. Waldron, the famous lecturer, came onto the platform and the meeting began. That evening he spoke about the creation of the Earth. He told us of the Earth in its early days - a huge mass of hot gas high up the skies. Then he spoke of the cooling of our planet, the formation of the mountains and oceans. He told us of the mysterious origin of life. Did it appear from the elements of the planet? Did it arrive from outside? Even the best scientists knew nothing.
Then the lecturer told of animal life. He started with mollusks, other primitive sea creatures and fishes. He pictured the dramatic past: the drying of the seas, the lagoons full of sea animals, the first sea creatures coming out from the sea.
"That was the time, ladies and gentlemen, when a frightening family of monstrous reptiles came to life. But they fortunately became extinct long before the first people."
"Question!" came a voice from the platform.
It surprised Mr. Waldron and he stopped his lecture for a moment, and then repeated slowly the words: "Which became extinct before the coming of man."
"Question!" he heard the voice again.
Waldron looked along the line of professors on the platform until he saw Professor Challenger.
"I see!" said Waldron, with a smile. "It is my friend Professor Challenger." And he went on and on. But when he spoke about extinct creatures, the audience heard the angry voice of the Professor.
"I must ask you to stop that!" said the lecturer and the hall got absolutely quiet.
Challenger stood up slowly.
"I must ask you, Mr. Waldron," the Professor said, "to stop saying what is against the facts. Ladies and gentlemen, first of all I must thank Mr. Waldron for an interesting lecture, which we have just listened. But there are some ideas against the facts. He thinks some types of animal became extinct. Mr. Waldron is very wrong because he has never seen a prehistoric animal. They are not extinct. How do I know, you ask me? I know because I have visited their secret home. I know because I have seen some of them. Am I a liar? Did I hear someone say that I was a liar?"
Then the time of chaos came. The Professor cried:
"Well, you disagree with me. Will you choose one or more of you to go out and test my words? Would Mr. Summerlee take part in it?"
Mr. Summerlee, an old and famous Professor of Zoology, agreed.
I saw it was the right moment to take my chance. Suddenly I saw a tall, thin man, with dark red hair. He looked back at me with hard angry eyes.
"I will go, Mr. Chairman," I said. "My name is Edward Dunn Malone. I am the reporter of the Daily Gazette."
"What is your name, sir?" the chairman asked the man with dark red hair.
"I am Lord John Roxton. I have spent some years on the banks of the Amazon..."
"Lord John Roxton is a world-famous traveller," said the chairman; "at the same time we would like to have a member of the Press upon such an expedition."
"Then I can see," said Professor Challenger, "that these three gentlemen will start the expedition to test my words."
That was the end of the meeting and in a few minutes I left the hall. I was walking under the silvery lights of Regent Street, full of thoughts of Gladys and of my future, when suddenly somebody touched my shoulder. I turned and saw the tall, thin man, my companion on this strange expedition.
"Mr. Malone," said he. "Now we are companions. Perhaps you will visit me. There are one or two things that I'd like to discuss with you."
When I came into his house, I saw rich furs and strange carpets on the floor, expensive old and modern pictures, the heads of animals from every part of the world on the walls. Lord John Roxton was one of the greatest travellers of his day.
He sat opposite me and looked at me with his eyes of a cold light blue, the color of a mountain lake.
"By the way," he said, "what do you know of this Professor Challenger?"
"I never saw him till today."
"Well, neither did I '. It's funny that we will follow the orders from a man we don't know. He seemed an old bird. His brothers of science don't like him. What is your interest in the expedition?"
I told him what had happened in the morning at the Professor's house. Roxton listened very carefully. Then he drew out a map of South America and put it on the table.
"I believe every word he said to you," said he. "South America is the greatest, richest, most wonderful land on this planet. People don't know it yet. I've been up and down it.' Well, I heard some Indian legends. Anything is possible in that country. There are some narrow waterways along which people travel. Outside that it is all darkness. As the Professor said tonight, there are fifty thousand miles of waterway running through a forest. And that forest is as big as Europe. Why shouldn't something new and wonderful hide in such a country? And why shouldn't we find it out? Besides, there's a risk in every mile of it. We're all getting too soft nowadays. Give me the great land, with a gun in my hand and something to look for and I'll be the happiest man in the world!"
We had a long talk at his place. But I had to leave for work. When I came to the newspaper office, McArdle was waiting for me. We agreed that I should write at home full reports of my adventures.

Chapter 3
We Disappear into the Unknown

It was a wet, foggy morning in the late spring. Three people were walking to the big ship. Professor Summerlee walked slowly. He was already very sorry for himself. Lord John Roxton walked bravely. His thin face looked really happy. As for myself, I hoped I looked happy too. Suddenly, there was a loud cry behind us.
It was Professor Challenger, he ran after us, red-faced and very angry.
"I have some words to tell you," he said. "Here is a letter. You will open it in the town Manaos, but not until the date and the hour written on it. Is that clear? Mr. Malone, I am not against your reports but I tell you to give no detail. You mustn't publish anything until your return. Good-bye."
We crossed the Atlantic without any problem. Then we started our way up the Amazon, a wide, slow river. At the town of Manaos we stayed at a hotel until the day marked on the letter. Before I reach the surprising events of that date I would like to say some words about my companions.
Professor Summerlee is a well-known scientist. He is tall and thin but he is never tired. He took part in some scientific expeditions, and the life of the camp and the canoe is not new to him. He is sixty-six but he is as strong as I am. In character he is always skeptical. From the beginning of our expedition he never stopped saying that Professor Challenger is an absolute liar. But when we landed from the ship, he forgot about Professor Challenger. He spends all days exploring the insect and bird world around. He is absolutely devoted to science.
Lord John Roxton always dresses very carefully and shaves at least once a day. Like most men of action, he is short in speech¹. But he is always quick to answer a question or join a conversation. He talks in a quick and humorous way. His knowledge of South America is great. He believes Professor Challenger absolutely. He spoke little of his visits to Brazil and Peru, so I was very surprised that natives knew and loved him. They even told legends about him.
Lord John Roxton was a South Americomaniac. He could not speak of that great country without great love, and this love was infectious.
"What is there?" he cried, pointing to the North. "Wood and swamps and jungle. Who knows what is over there? No white man has ever been there. The unknown is on every side. Who will say what is possible in such a country? Why should Challenger not be right?"
So, that's enough about my two white companions. Now I'm going to tell you about the others. The first is a gigantic Negro named Zambo. He is a black Hercules, as strong as a horse, and about as intelligent. At the town of Para two natives, Gomez and Manuel, joined us. They looked like two panthers: active and frightening. Both of them spent their lives in those places, which we were going to explore.
At last, after a week, the day had come and the hour. We were sitting round the table with the letter on it. Lord John put his watch on the table.
"We have seven more minutes," he said.
"Let's open it now!" said Summerlee.
"Oh, come, there must be rules in every game!" said Lord John. "It's old man Challenger's show!?"
"I don't know what is inside this letter. If there is nothing important, I would catch the first ship and go back to England. I wouldn't like to follow the instructions of a London lunatic.
Now, Roxton, it is time."
Lord John opened the letter and took out a paper. It was as white as snow. Not a word on it. We looked at each other and Professor Summerlee went laughing.
"So," he cried. "he is a liar! We are returning home. Then we will report him as a champion liar."
"May I come in?" came a voice from the door. That voice! Professor Challenger, in a round, boyish hat - Challenger, with his hands in his pockets came into the room.
"I'm sorry I am some minutes late," said he, looking at his watch. "But I was sure you would never open it. I wanted to join you before the hour. Professor Summerlee, have you got a chance to laugh at me?"
Professor Challenger shook hands with me and Lord John, said "Hello" to Professor Summerlee, and sat into an armchair.
"As to the small trick, which I played on you... From the very beginning I decided to join you. I didn't tell you about it because I didn't want to travel with you. But from now on you are in safe hands. I'll be your guide. Get ready! We make an early start in the morning."
So we did. For three days we sailed up the Amazon. It was so wide that from its center we couldn't see its banks. On the fourth day we turned into a smaller river. After two days' voyage we came to an Indian village. Then the Professor sent back our ship, because there were rapids ahead. He also told us that we were coming to the door of the unknown country.
The very next day we made our start on two canoes. For two days we made our way up a river, dark in colour, but very clear. We could see the river bottom. Twice we came across rapids, and had to carry our luggage.
How shall I ever forget its mystery? The trees were the highest. They looked like Gothic cathedrals. Their branches formed the green roof. Sometimes golden sunshine went downwards among the darkness. We walked quietly on the thick, soft carpet of fallen leaves. We felt important as we feel in Westminster Abbey. The effect was as a dream of fairyland.
In these great woods the dark means death. And every plant makes its way up. Everything tries to get sunshine. Climbing plants are monstrous, but the others learn the art of climbing, too.
The animal life was rather poor. But above our heads there was a world of snake and monkey and bird. They lived in the sunshine, and looked down in wonder at our little dark figures. Early in the morning and in the evening the monkeys and parrots cried together. But during the hot hours of the day only the buzz of insects filled our ears.
About three o'clock in the afternoon we came to a very dangerous rapid. It was the place where the canoe of Professor
Challenger turned over.
Then we went more than ten miles. Suddenly Professor Challenger showed us a tree on the opposite bank of the river.
"What do you think of that?" he asked.
"It is a palm," said Summerlee.
"You are right. But it is not just a palm, it is my landmark.
There is a secret opening on the other side of the river. There is no break in the trees. That is the wonder and the mystery of it.
That is my private gate into the unknown."
It was indeed a wonderful place. We went through that gate. We found ourselves in a small quiet river, running over a sandy bottom.
The thick branches met over our heads, and through this tunnel in a golden light flowed the green, shiny river. It was as clear as crystal. It went under its leafy archway. It was an avenue to a land of wonders.
Now we could see animals more often. We met hundreds of little black monkeys, with snow white teeth and smiling eyes.
Once a dark funny tapir looked at us from the bushes. Then he run away through the forest. Once the yellow puma appeared among the trees, and its green hateful eyes quickly looked at us. There were thousands of birds. Blue, red, and white, they were sitting on every branch along the river. For three days we went through the tunnel of green sunshine. The deep peace of this strange waterway was fantastic!
On the third day the river became so small that we couldn't go on our journey in the canoes. We drew the canoes up and hid them among the bushes. Then we packed our food and started on our way on foot.
Soon the small river disappeared in a great green swamp. Clouds of mosquitoes filled the air around. But we went on
walking. On the second day after leaving our canoes we found that the country had changed. Our road was all way up, and the woods became thinner and lost their tropical beauty. The tall trees of the Amazonian forest gave place to the coco palms.
On the ninth day, the trees became even smaller. The bamboo was so thick that we had to cut our way through it. It was very tiring and monotonous. Even at the most open places, I could only see the back of Lord John's cotton jacket in front of me. Yellow walls of bamboos were on either side. I do not know what kind of creatures lived there. Sometimes we heard large, heavy animals near us. Just as night fell we went out of bamboos, and formed our camp.
Early next morning we found that the character of the country had changed again. Tree ferns were growing everywhere.
Suddenly Professor Challenger stopped and pointed to the right. And at the distance of a mile we saw something. It looked like a great grey bird. It was flying very low. Then it disappeared among the tree ferns.
"Did you see it?" cried Challenger. "Summerlee, did you see it?"
"What it was?" he asked.
"A pterodactyl."
Summerlee laughed. "It was a stork!"
Challenger was too angry to speak. Lord John came to me and said:
"I am not sure, but it wasn't a bird."
Next day we came into a place covered with palm trees, and then we could see the line of high red cliffs.
There it lies in front of my eyes. There can be no question that it is the same. Challenger looks proud, and Summerlee is silent, but still skeptical.

Chapter Four
Who Could have foreseen it?

A terrible thing has happened to us. I think our troubles will never end. We are as far from any human help as if we were on the moon. My three companions are men of great courage. There lies our one and only hope.
When I finished my last letter, we were seven miles from red cliffs. That night we made our camp near them. The cliffs above us were too dangerous and high, so the way up was out of the question². Close to us was the high thin rock. It was as high as the plateau, and there grew one large tree.
"That is the tree," said Professor Challenger, "where the pterodactyl was sitting. I climbed half way up the rock before I shot him."
When Challenger was speaking of the pterodactyl, I looked at Professor Summerlee. For the first time I didn't see any skepticism in his eyes.
"Of course," said Challenger, "Professor Summerlee will understand that when I speak of a pterodactyl I mean a stork. You know, it is the kind of stork which has membranous wings and teeth in its beak."
All the morning we spent thinking over the way to climb the plateau.
"I think we will travel along the cliff to the west," said Challenger. "We shall travel round it until we find an easy way up it, or come back to our camp. I told you that there must be the way up."
"How do you know that, sir?" asked Summerlee.
"Because the American Maple White actually climbed it. Or where could he see the monster?"
"I have not seen any living monsters there."
The ground at the foot of the cliff was rocky and broken. Suddenly we came up on an old camp.
"It must be Maple White's," said Challenger.
Along the cliff there grew a high bamboo. It was twenty feet high, with sharp, strong tops. It looked like a wall of spears. Suddenly I saw something white. I looked inside and found myself near a skeleton. There were only small pieces of clothes left, but it had boots on its bony feet. It was very clear that the dead man was a European.
"Who can he be?" asked Lord John. "Poor devil! Every bone in his body is broken."
"I know who he was Maple White's companion, an American. And we are now looking at him," said Professor Challenger.
"And we know," said Lord John, "how he met his death."
We stood silently round the skeleton and realized the truth of Lord John Roxton's words. No doubt, he had fallen from the top. But had he fallen? Or..?
We continued our way along the cliffs in silence. In five miles we saw no break and no hole in them. And then suddenly we noticed something on the rocks. It filled us with new hope. That was an arrow drawn in chalk. It pointed westwards.
"Maple White again," said Professor Challenger. "He was sure the others would follow him."
In five more miles we saw another white arrow on the rocks. It pointed upward. We had had no food for many hours, and were very tired, but we couldn't stop now and started our way up the narrow tunnel. Suddenly we saw an opening of a cave.
When we reached it, we found another arrow near it. No doubt, here was the place, where Maple White and his companion started their way up. We were too excited to return to the camp and made our first exploration at once. Lord John had an electric light and we followed him. First the cave ran straight into the rock. Finally we found ourselves climbing upon our hands and knees. Suddenly we heard a voice of Lord Roxton.
"It's blocked!" said he. "The roof has fallen in!"
The way of Maple White didn't exist any more. So we had to get out of the cave. And yet, as we looked up at that beautiful green world only a few hundreds of feet above our heads, nobody thought of returning to London.
In our camp we discussed the situation and decided to continue out way round the plateau. We hoped to find some other way to the top. We made a long march that day but found nothing.
We noticed a great change both in the temperature and in the plants. Some of those horrible tropical insects disappeared. We could see few palms but many tree ferns.
That night - I am still speaking of the first day near the plateau - it happened for the first time.
Well, that night Lord John killed an ajouti which is a small, pig like animal. We were sitting round the fire and cooking it. It was rather cold after dark and we got close to the fire. The night was moonless. Well, suddenly out of the darkness, out of the night, there appeared something with a sound like an aeroplane. We were covered for a moment by something. We felt leathery wings on our faces. I saw a long, snake like neck, an angry, red, hungry eye, and a great sharp beak, filled with little teeth. The next moment it was gone - and so was our dinner. A huge black shadow flew up into the air. For a moment the monster wings covered the stars, and then it disappeared behind the cliff. We all sat in silence round the fire. It was Summerlee who was the first to speak.'
"Professor Challenger," said he, "sir, I hope that you will forget what is past."
And the two men for the first time shook hands. We were so happy to see them smiling at each other. Soon we forgot about our stolen supper.
During the next three days we didn't see any prehistoric animals. We went on and on across the stony desert. Then it turned into green grey swamps full of many wild birds. We saw many Jaracaca snakes, the most poisonous and aggressive in South America. They always attack man at first sight. Again and again these horrible creatures came towards us across the swamp and we could feel safe from them only because we kept our guns ready all the time. I will never forget the terrible place. There were too many of them, so we ran as fast as we could. I shall always remember as we looked back how far behind we
could see the heads and necks of our horrible snakes among the reeds. Jaracaca Swamp we named it in the map.
On the sixth day we found ourselves back at the first camp, near the high thin rock. We were tired and unhappy. It was clear that there was no way up the plateau.
What should we do now? Our food will come to an end one day. In two or three months the rains will start and we will have to leave our camp. No wonder that we spent a sleepless night. I remember that when I was falling asleep. I saw Challenger sitting by the fire. He was in the deepest thought. He didn't turn his head to my "good night".
But it was a very different Challenger who said "good-morning" to us. His eyes were shining. He looked very excited and absolutely happy.
"Eureka!" he cried. "Gentlemen, the problem is solved."
"You have found a way up?"
For answer he pointed to the high thin rock. Challenger told us that it was possible to climb that rock. But a horrible abyss was between it and the plateau.
"We can never get across," I said.
"We can at least reach the top of the rock," said he. "When we are up, I will show you that the resources of my mind are endless."
After breakfast we started our way up. It was not a very difficult task, though there were moments that made my hair move on my head. I had never climbed rocks before. Challenger was a great help to us. He was the first to reach the top. Then he fixed the rope round the big tree. It helped us to climb that stony wall until we found ourselves upon the small grassy platform.
We were standing up there and looking around. There were endless tropical forests around us. The plateau was as high as the rock we were standing on. It seemed to be very near to us.
But it was impossible to reach it.
"Just look at it," said Professor Summerlee.
I turned, and found that he was examining the tree with great interest. Its trunk, branches and small dark green leaves.
"It is our one and only hope," said Challenger.
"A bridge!" cried Lord John, "a bridge!"
"Exactly, my friends, a bridge! I have already told to our young friend here that Challenger is at his best when his back is to the wall. That's the best way to find the way out. We needed a bridge. Here it is!"
It was a brilliant idea. I made some deep cuts in the tree and the tree fell with a loud crash. That was our bridge to the unknown!
It didn't take Professor Challenger long to cross the abyss.
As soon as he was at the other side, he cried: "At last!" Every thing around him was quiet, only a strange, many coloured bird flew up from under his feet and disappeared among the trees.
Summerlee was the second. I came next, and tried hard not to look down into the horrible abyss over which I was passing. As to Lord John, he walked across actually walked! He must have nerves of iron.
And there we were, the four of us, in the dreamland, the lost world of Maple White. To all of us it seemed to be the moment of our triumph.
We started our way inside the thick bushes, when there came a terrible crash from behind us. We ran back. The bridge was gone!
Far down at the bottom of the cliff we saw it broken to pieces. In a moment we saw the face of Gomez, our servant.
He was standing on the grassy platform across the abyss. But there was no smile but hatred on his face.
"Lord Roxton!" he shouted. "Lord John Roxton!"
"Well," said our companion, "here I am."
Laughter came across the abyss.
"Yes, there you are, you English dog, and there you will stay for ever! I have waited and waited, and now has come my chance. You found it hard to get up; you will find it harder to get down. When you are dying, think of Lopez, whom you shot five years ago. I am his brother." These were his last words, he disappeared and all was quiet.
We could see him getting down the rock; but before he could reach the ground Lord John had run along the abyss with the gun in his hands. Then we heard a sound of his gun and then the sound of the falling body.
"I have been a fool," Roxton said, "I have brought you all into this trouble. I have forgotten that these people have long memories."
Gomez was dead but we were in the greatest trouble. We had been natives of the world²; now we were natives of the plateau. We could see the way, which led to the canoes. Beyond the violet horizon was the river, which led back to civilization. But there was no bridge between them, between us and our past lives.
For the moment we could only sit among the bushes and wait for the coming of Zambo, our true servant. At last his figure appeared on the top of the rock. "What must I do now?" he cried. "Whenever you come, you will always find me here. But I can't keep Indians. They say Curupuri live here, and they will go home."
First of all, Zambo threw one end of the rope across the abyss. Then he brought up some food and some other necessary things. We got it across the abyss with the help of the rope.
We made our camp and had a cold supper. We decided not to make any fire. The next day we would start the exploration of this strange land. Our position is hopeless. I only hope you will get this letter one day.

Chapter Five
The Most Wonderful Things Have Happened

The most wonderful things have happened and are happening to us. I have only one pencil and five old notebooks. But as long as I can move my hand, I will go on writing everything down. We are the only men to see such things.
Our first morning on the plateau came. First we had to choose the right place for our future camp. We found a small clearing with thick trees around. There were some big rocks in the center, with a small river near by. We cut down some bushes and tree branches and put them round in a circle. This was our camp. Fort Challenger, we called it.
It was before noon when we finished, but it wasn't very hot. One huge gingko tree, the tallest of all, shot its great branches over our fort. In its shade we continued our discussion. Lord John gave us his ideas.
"We are safe, till nobody sees us," said he. "From the time they know we are here, our troubles will begin. So our game is to stay quiet for a time and explore the land. We should have a good look at our neighbours before they notice us."
"But we must go forward," I said.
"Oh yes, my boy! We will. But we must never go so far that we can't get back to our camp. And we must never, unless it is life or death, fire off our guns."
"But you fired yesterday," said Summerlee.
"Well, I had no choice. By the way, what shall we call this place? I think we must give it a name."
There were some ideas, more or less happy, but Challenger's was final. "It can only have one name," said he. "It is called after the man who discovered it. It is Maple White Land." Maple White Land it became, and so it is named in that map, which has become my special task.
We knew that some unknown creatures lived there, and the pictures from Maple White's sketch book showed that more terrible and more dangerous monsters could appear. We also remembered the skeleton with broken bones and the bamboos gone through them². Perhaps, there were some human beings here, on the plateau.
We left our camp and followed the little river, and very soon we came across some real wonders. We went through a thick forest, and the trees were unknown to me. Summerlee recognized them as forms, which disappeared long time ago.
Suddenly Lord John, who was walking first, stopped us. "Look at this!" said he: "This must be the track of the father of all birds! And it is fresh! See, here is the track of a little one!"
We saw a huge three - toed track in the soft ground before us. We all stopped to examine it. The foot was much larger than an ostrich ' s and the size of the monstrous creature must be enormous. We also saw smaller tracks of the same form running parallel to the large ones.
"But what do you think of this?" cried Professor Summerlee, pointing to the huge track.
"Wealden!" cried Challenger, in an ecstasy. "I've seen them in the Wealden clay. This creature walks on three - toed feet, and from time to time puts one of its five - fingered front - feet on the ground. Not a bird, my dear Roxton not a bird."
"A beast?"
"No; a reptile - a dinosaur."
His words died away, and we all stood silently. We followed the tracks and came to an opening, and in the middle there were five of the most extraordinary creatures. We hid among the bushes and watched the creatures with greatest interest.
There were five of them, two were big and three very young.
The babies were as big as elephants. The large animals were much bigger. All five were sitting up, balancing on their wide, powerful tails and their huge three - toed hind - feet. They pulled down the branches with their small five - fingered front - feet. They ate the leaves with great appetite. They looked like monstrous kangaroos, twenty feet in length, and with skins like black crocodiles.
I do not know how long we stayed looking at this wonderful spectacle. I looked at my friends. Lord John was standing near me. His hunter's soul was shining from his eyes. The two professors were silent. They took each other by the hand, and stood like two little children in the presence of a wonder.
"What will they say in England of this?" Summerlee cried at last.
"My dear Summerlee, I will tell you exactly what they will say in England," said Challenger. "They will say that you are a liar and a scientific charlatan, exactly as you and others said of me."
"Photographs?"
"They would call them fakes, Summerlee!"
"Species?"
"Ah, there we may have them!' August the twenty - eighth - the day we saw five live iguanodons in an opening of Maple White Land. Write it down in your diary, my young friend, and send it to your newspaper."
"What did you say they were?" asked Lord John.
"Iguanodons," said Summerlee. "You can find their foot marks in Kent, and in Sussex. The South of England was full of them when there were a lot of green leaves there. The climate has changed, and the monsters died out. Not here."
"I'd like to have its head on my wall," said Lord John. "My God, how some of my friends will turn beautiful pea-green when they see it!"
I had the feeling of mystery and danger around us. Those monstrous creatures iguanodons were not dangerous at all. But in this world of wonders what other creatures live? Peaceful ones? Or dangerous? I knew little of prehistoric life, but I remembered one book. It spoke of creatures that lived on our lions and tigers as a cat lives on mice.
In our first morning in the new country we learnt about great dangers around us. It was a dreadful adventure - the swamp of pterodactyls.
We went very slowly through the woods. Every moment our professors fell down with a cry of wonder, before some flower or insect of a new type. We travelled about two or three miles,
and then we came upon a large opening in the trees. Behind thick trees we could see a lot of grey rocks. We slowly started towards them, and suddenly heard a strange low sound. It came from some place right in front of us. Lord John held up his hand as a signal to stop. Then he came up to the rocks. I looked at his face and understood that he saw something wonderful but dangerous.
When we looked over the rocks we could see hundreds of pterodactyls. Some hundreds of yards below we noticed their young ones. Terrible mothers were sitting on their leathery, yellowish eggs. From this noisy mass of dreadful reptiles came the shocking noise. It filled the air. The horrible smell turned us sick. But above, sitting on their own stone, tall, grey, more like dead and dried than alive, sat their horrible fathers, absolutely silent. From time to time they moved their red eyes and caught a dragonfly with their sharp beaks. Their large, membranous wings were closed and they sat like gigantic old women covered with awful grey coats. Large and small, not less than a thousand of these ugly creatures were there.
Our professors would like to stay there all day. They got a chance to study the life of a prehistoric age. They pointed out the fish and dead birds lying about among the rocks. I heard them saying they had found at last why the bones of this flying dragon are found in such great numbers in the certain areas. It was now seen that, like penguins, they lived in great companies.
But the moment Challenger showed his head over the rock, he nearly brought the most terrible death on us all². In a second the nearest creature gave a cry and flew up into the air. In a moment the whole circle of pterodactyls rose one after the other and sailed off into the sky. It was wonderful to see about a hundred of dreadful creatures above our heads. Soon we realized the danger. At first the pterodactyls flew round in a circle. Then, the flight grew lower and the circle was getting smaller, until the dry loud sound of their grey wings filled the air. The wings of those nearest to us nearly touched our faces. They attacked us. Summerlee gave a cry and put his hand to his face. I felt a strong pain at the back of my neck. At the same moment I heard the sound of Lord John's gun, and saw one of the creatures with a broken wing on the ground. With a wide opened beak and bloody eyes it looked like a devil in an old picture. Other pterodactyls flew higher at the sound, and were circling above our heads.
"Now," cried Lord John, "now for our lives!!"
We ran through the wood, and the pterodactyls attacked us again and again. Summerlee was tired out and fell on the ground. We put him up and ran to the trees. There we were safe, because the creatures couldn't fly among the trees. On our way back to the camp, we saw them for a long time. They were flying in the deep blue sky, round and round. Their eyes were following us.
"I was sorry to fire my gun," said Lord John. "But now, we should get back to our camp. I wonder if the monsters have poison in their beaks."
At last we reached our camp. We thought that our adventures were over. The entrance of Fort Challenger and the walls were unbroken, but we understood at once that some strange and powerful creature had visited it. All our things were around.2 Again the feeling of horror came on us, and we looked round at the dark shadows. How good it was when we heard the voice of Zambo and saw him sitting and smiling at us.
"Everything is OK, Mr. Challenger!" he cried. "I will stay here. You will always find me when you want."
Late in the evening the professors started their scientific dispute again. I didn't want to listen to it and moved away. I was sitting smoking on a fallen tree, when Lord John came up to me.
"I say, Malone," he said, "Do you remember that place where those flying monsters live?"
"Very clearly."
"Did you notice ground round the water?"
"It was of blue colour. It looked like clay. What of that?" I asked.
"Oh, nothing, nothing," said he. Once again that night I heard him talking to himself: "Blue clay, blue clay!"

Chapter Six
For once I Was the Hero

Lord John Roxton was right about the poison in pterodactyl ' s beaks. Next morning Summerlee and I were in great pain. Challenger ' s leg hurt and he couldn't walk. We stayed in our camp all day. All day long Lord John was making our camp walls thicker and stronger. I remember that during the whole long day I felt somebody watching us. I was sure that something terrible was going to happen.
That night (our third night in Maple White Land) we were all sleeping round our fire when suddenly the most terrible cry woke us. It was as loud as the sound of train. It was filled with agony and horror. And then, under this high, ringing sound there was another, a low laugh. For three or four minutes the frightening duet continued. Then it stopped as suddenly as it began. For a long time we sat in silence.
"What was it?" I asked.
"We shall know in the morning," said Lord John. "It happened near to our camp."
"A prehistoric tragedy has just finished. The greater dragon killed the smaller one," said Challenger.
Summerlee raised his hand. "Hush!" he cried. "Can you hear it?"
There came a deep sound. We could hear soft but heavy steps. An animal was slowly coming to our camp. Then it stopped near us.
In the deep shadow of the tree there was a deeper shadow. It was no higher than a horse, but we understood it was a monster. Once, I thought I saw two terrible, greenish eyes.
"I believe it is going to jump!" I said.
"Don't fire! Don't fire!" told Lord John. He picked up a burning branch, and ran towards it. He threw the burning wood into its face. For one moment I noticed a horrible mask of a giant toad. Its open mouth was covered with fresh blood. In a moment our terrible visitor was gone.
"I was sure it was afraid of the fire," said Lord John, laughing, as he came back.
"Well, I think that we are lucky! What was he, then?"
Our professors looked at each other. They couldn't name the creature but they were sure it was a meat eater.
We decided to go to our broken sleep but from that time on we never did it without a watchman.
In the morning we discovered the reason of the dreadful cry. The iguanodon glade was the scene of a horrible tragedy. There was blood and great pieces of meet all over the green grass. We decided that some animals were killed, but
later we understood that one aggressive animal killed the weaker creature. All this blood and meat came from one iguanodon.
"These can be the marks of a sabre toothed tiger, but that night we saw a creature of a larger size and more reptilian in character. I think it was allosaurus," said Professor Challenger.
"Sh-h! The less noise the better," said Lord Roxton. "We don't know who or what is near us."
I have told you about the terrors of Maple White Land; but there was another side of this land². In the morning we walked among lovely flowers. In many places the ground was covered with them. We walked on that wonderful flower carpet and the smell was so strong that we felt sick with its sweetness. Many of the trees had their branches filled with sweet juicy fruit. In the jungle we saw strange foot marks of the iguanodon. Once in a glade we saw some of these great creatures.
One evening we talked about our future.
"We must find a way out of this land. That's what we must be doing now³, tomorrow and all the time," Summerlee said, "But I can see that you are all thinking about getting into this country. I am sure that we should be trying to get out of it."
"I am surprised, sir," said Challenger, "that a man of science has such ideas. You are in a land, which is new to the whole world. Do you want to leave it before we have explored it? Shame on you, Professor Summerlee."
"I think," Lord John said, "it's not the right time for going back to London."
"I will never walk into the office of my paper," said I. "I won't leave this land behind me. But why are we discussing it? We can't get down, even if we wanted."
"There is no reason to go on exploration," Summerlee said. "Can you remember that we came here on a special mission? We know that Professor Challenger was right about the prehistoric animals. That means we have finished our work. As to the detail... I am sure that only a large expedition can be successful at it. Should we try to do it ourselves? The only result must be that we shall never return back home. We will never bring the important information to science. Professor Challenger found a way for getting us on to this plateau. Let's ask him to get us back to the world."
He was right and everybody knew it, even Challenger nodded his head.
"I agree with our colleague that we should think about our return. But I absolutely refuse to leave the Maple White land before we make its map."
"We have spent two long days here," Professor Summerlee said, "but we don't know anything about its geography. We know that it is covered with thick woods. It will take us months to cross it and to explore it. There is no mountain to climb and see the whole land."
Then a brilliant idea came to my mind. The large gingko tree was growing near us. It was the highest - so it was a watch tower! I have always been a good tree climber.
"My God, young boy, you are a genius!" said Lord John. "Be quick! It will get dark in an hour. Don't forget to take your notebook. You will get a chance to make a sketch of the place."
It wasn't very difficult to climb that tree. There were a lot of thick branches and soon I was high up the tree and my friends were far below. There was nothing but green leaves around me. The tree was a real giant. I looked up and saw nothing but leaves above my head.
Suddenly I saw something thick and bush like on the branch. I tried to have a more careful look at it, and I nearly fell out of the tree in my surprise and horror.
A face was looking at me. It was a human face. It was a long, whitish face with a flat nose. The eyes were angry and frightening. For a moment I read hatred in its eyes, then fear followed. There came a crash of broken branches because the creature jumped wildly down the tree. I saw a hairy body like that of a pig.
"What's the matter?" shouted Roxton from below. "Anything wrong with you?"
"Did you see it?" I cried.
"We heard a sound. What was it?"
I was so shocked with that ape man that I wanted to climb down and tell everything to my friends. But then I decided to go on my way up. The leaves were getting thinner around me. I learned, from the wind upon my face, that I was above all the trees. I looked down and saw the most wonderful panorama of this strange country.
The evening was bright and clear, so I could see the whole plateau. It was oval, about thirty miles long and twenty miles wide. There was a lake in the centre. It was green and beautiful in the evening light. The sandbanks looked golden in the soft sunshine. I saw something long and dark, too large for alligators and too long for canoes. With my glass I could see that they were alive.
In the wood I could see the glade of the iguanodons and the swamp of the pterodactyls. On the opposite side, the plateau looked different. There were basalt cliffs and along the base of these red cliffs I could see many dark holes, which looked like caves. At the opening of one of these there was something white. I sat on the branch making the plan. Then I climbed down to my friends.
For once I was the hero of the expedition. I had the plan, which would save us a month's blind walking among unknown dangers. Each of them shook my hand.
But before they discussed the details of my map I told them of the ape man among the branches.
"He has been there all the time," I said.
"How do you know that?" asked Lord John.
"Because I have always had a feeling that something was watching us. I told you about it, Professor Challenger."
"Our young friend certainly said something of the kind. Tell me, now," he added, "did you notice if the creature had a tail?"
"No."
"Did it use its feet as hands?"
"I do not think it could move so fast among the branches without it..."
"In South America there are some thirty - six kinds of monkeys. But the ape is unknown here. It is clear that you have seen it. The question is whether he is more closely to the ape or the man. Maybe it is the ' missing link '". This problem is of great importance."
"It is nothing of the sort," said Summerlee. "Now that, thanks to Mr. Malone, we have got our map. And now we must get out of this terrible place. We must leave the further exploration to others."
"Well," said Challenger, "I'll feel much better when the results of our expedition reach England. I have no idea how we will get down. But I have never had any problem, which my brain couldn't solve. I promise you that tomorrow I will find the way out."
That evening the first map of the lost world was made. Every detail, which I had noticed from my watch tower, was put down. Challenger's pencil stopped near the great spot - the lake.
"What shall we call it?" he asked. "It's up to you, young friend, to name the lake. You saw it first, and, if you choose to put ' Lake Malone ' on it, no one has a better right."
"Then, let it be named Lake Gladys."
Challenger looked at me smiling, and shook his great head.
"Boys will be boys," said he. "Lake Gladys let it be."

Chapter Seven
It Was Dreadful in the Forest

I was very excited by the adventure of the tree, and I couldn't fall asleep. The full moon was shining brightly, and the air was pleasantly cold. What a night for a walk! And then suddenly came the thought, "Why not to go down to the central lake and be back at breakfast with some new facts?" I thought of Gladys, with her "There are heroisms all round us." I seemed to hear her voice as she said it. I thought also of McArdle. What a three - column article for the paper! What a career! I took a gun and quickly went away.
In some minutes I realized how dreadful it was in the forest. The trees grew so thick that I could not see the moonlight. I thought of the dreadful scream of the iguanodon. I thought of that terrible monster near our camp. At any moment it could jump on me from the dark this nameless and horrible monster.
The darkness of the forest was frightening, but even worse was the white moonlight in the open glade of the iguanodons. I hid among the bushes and looked out at it. There were no monsters there. Perhaps they all had gone. In the silvery night I could see no living thing. I found the small river and decided to follow it. It could lead me to the lake. It could also help me to find my way back.
On the way to the lake I tried not to get under the great moonlight. I was going in the dark. When I heard the crash of breaking branches my heart stopped beating. Now and then great shadows appeared for a moment and were gone - great, soundless shadows which seemed to walk on soft feet.
At last (my watch showed that it was one in the morning) I saw water, and ten minutes later I was on the banks of the central lake. I was very thirsty, so I lay down and drank fresh and cold water of the prehistoric lake. There was a wide path with many tracks on it. It was a drinking place! Near the water there was a huge rock of lava. Up this I climbed, and, lying on the top, I looked around.
I was very surprised when I saw the mouths of caves. Now, I saw light in every cave. Suddenly I realized that they were the fires burning inside the caves. The men lit them! There were people on the plateau! Here was news to bring back to London!
For a long time I watched the lights. What race was that?
Lake Gladys my own lake lay before me. It was not deep, in many places I could see signs of life, sometimes little rings in the water, sometimes a great silver fish in the air, sometimes the black back of a monster. Once on a yellow sand I saw a creature like a huge swan, with a high neck. For some time I could see it swimming. Then it dived, and I saw it no more.
Then I saw what was going near the water. Two creatures like large armadillos came to the drinking place. A huge deer,
with branching horns, a beautiful creature, which carried itself like a king, came down with its family and drank crystal water. Suddenly it gave a warning cry, and was off. A newcomer, a most monstrous animal, was coming down the path.
For a moment I thought: "Where did I see that back, that strange bird like head?" It was the stegosaurus - the very creature that Maple White had in his sketch book! There he was perhaps the very creature which the American artist had met. The ground shook under him. Now he was so close to me that I could touch his back. He drank water and disappeared among the rocks.
I looked at my watch and saw that it was half past two o'clock. It was high time to start on my way back. I was going to tell fine news to my friends.
I was on my way home, when I heard a strange noise behind me. It was low, deep, and frightening. A strange creature was near me, but I saw nothing. I walked faster. In some minutes I heard the sound again, but louder and more frightening. The beast was after me. My skin grew cold and my hair rose at the thought. I remembered the dreadful bloody face, which we saw near our camp. My knees were shaking. I stopped and looked down the moonlit path. All was quiet in a dream landscape. Then there came that low, throaty sound ', far louder and closer. Something was hunting me.
Then suddenly I saw it. Something was moving in the bushes. A great dark shadow hopped out into the moonlight. The beast moved like a kangaroo. It was of great size and power. When I saw its shape, I thought it was an iguanodon, but I soon saw that it was a very different creature. Instead of the gentle, deer shaped head of the great three toed leaf eater, this beast had a broad toad like face. It looked like the monster that had frightened us in our camp. It was a meat eating dinosaur, the most terrible beast, which had ever walked this earth. From time to time the huge monster brought its nose to the ground. It was smelling out me.¹
What could I do? I looked round for some rock or tree, but there was no one around. I threw my useless gun away and ran. At last I stopped, I thought that I was safe. And then suddenly the monster was near me. He was just behind my back. I was lost.
The moonlight shone on his huge eyes and sharp teeth in his open mouth. With a cry of terror I turned and ran wildly down the path. Behind me the thick breathing of the creature sounded louder and louder. And then suddenly there came a crash. I was falling down.
When I opened my eyes, I felt the most dreadful smell. I stood upon my feet and came upon a big piece of meat. Then my hand touched a large bone. Up above me there was dark blue sky. I realized that I was at the bottom of a deep pit. I was sore from head to foot, but my arms and legs were not broken. Then I looked up in terror. There was no sign of the monster and I began to walk slowly round. I tried to find out what this strange place was.
It was a pit. The bottom was covered with great pieces of meat. The atmosphere was poisonous and horrible. Suddenly I came against something hard, and I found that it was an upright post in the center of the pit. It was so high that I could not reach the top of it with my hand.
Suddenly I remembered about a box of matches in my pocket. I lit the match and had a better look. It was a trap and it was made by the hand of man.
I remembered that Challenger said that man could not live on the plateau. With his weak weapons he could not survive
among the monsters. But now I knew how they survived. In their caves the natives lived safe. With their developed brains they could make the traps to hunt monsters. Man was always the master.
I wasn't afraid to meet the monster. I remembered that both professors said that the monsters were very stupid. I was sure the monster wasn't waiting for me. I got out of the pit and started on my way back to the camp.
And suddenly I heard the sound of a gun. I stopped and listened, but there was nothing more. For a moment I was shocked at the thought of some sudden danger. So I hurried back home as fast as possible.
I was tired out, so I couldn't run very fast. At last I reached the places, which I knew. I shouted the names of my friends but no answer came back to me. I ran faster. Finally I reached the camp but the gate was open. I ran in. My friends disappeared, and near the fireplace there was blood.
I was so shocked that for a time I nearly lost my reason. I ran all round the empty camp, calling for my friends. No answer came back. The horrible thought came: "I will never see them again. I will be left alone in that dreadful place. I will never return into the world below. I will live and die in that nightmare country." I realized that without my friends I was like a child in the dark, helpless and powerless. I did not know which way to turn or what to do first.
Some hours passed and I tried to discover what had happened to my friends. I was sure that somebody had attacked them. I heard only one gun shot. It showed that it had been all over in a moment². The blankets of Challenger and of Summerlee near the fire showed that they had been asleep at the time. Our guns, cameras were in the right places but no food
was left. They were animals, then, and not natives, who had made the attack.
But what happened to my friends? Did a monster kill them? There was a pool of blood. The monster that followed me during the night could carry away a person as easily as a cat could carry a mouse.
Suddenly a thought came to me. I was not alone in the world. Down at the bottom of the cliff was Zambo. I went to the edge of the plateau. Zambo was sitting near the fire in his little camp. But a second man was sitting in front of him. He was an Indian. I shouted loudly and Zambo looked up and climbed the rock. In a short time he was standing close to me and listening to the story, which I told him.
"Devil got them, Mister," he said. "You got into the devil ' s country and he will take you all to himself. Take my advice, Mister Malone, and come down quick, else he will get you as well."
"How can I come down, Zambo?"
"Send for ropes, Mister Malone."
"Who can I send, and where?"
"Send to Indian villages. There is an Indian down below.
He is one of our Indians. Other ones beat him and took away his money. He came back to us. Ready now to take letter, bring rope anything."
A letter! Why not? Perhaps he will bring help; and the news can reach our friends at home. I had two finished letters. The Indian could take them to the world. I told Zambo to come again in the evening, and I spent my lonely day writing down my own adventures the night before. I threw the papers to Zambo in the evening, and also all English money I had.

Chapter Eight
I Shall Never Forget It

In the evening sun I watched an Indian until he disappeared. It was quite dark when I came to the camp. Now I felt happier. Our names would not die with our bodies.
But I couldn't fall asleep for a long time. I didn't feel safe so I made three fires and then fell into a heavy sleep. What a nice awakening I had in the morning! A hand touched my arm. I jumped up. In the cold grey light I saw Lord John Roxton.
But he looked different. Now his face was white and covered with blood. His eyes were wild, his clothes were dirty, and his hat was gone. I looked at him in surprise, but he gave me no chance for questions.
"Quick, young boy!" he cried. "Get our guns, both of them. Now, some food. That's all right! Quick, or we are done!"
I didn't understand anything. In a moment we were running through the wood. Suddenly he fell on the ground and pulled me down.
"What is going on?" I asked. "Where are the professors? Who is hunting us?"
"The ape men," he cried. "My God, what creatures! Speak in a low voice, because they have long ears and sharp eyes. I don't think they can smell us out because they have no power of smell. Where have you been, young boy?"
In a few sentences I told him about my night adventure.
"Oh dear!" said he, when he had heard of the dinosaur and the pit. "It isn't quite the place for holidays."
"What happened in the camp?" I asked.
"Early in the morning we were sleeping peacefully. Suddenly it rained apes. They came down as thick as apples out of a tree. I call them apes, but they carried sticks and stones in their hands. They talked to each other. They are cleverer than any creature that I have seen in my life. When I shot one of them, they carried him off. Then they sat around us. I saw death in their faces. They were big creatures, as big as a man and much stronger. Curious glassy grey eyes they have, under red eyebrows, and they just sat and looked carefully at us. Challenger is no chicken², but even he was frightened."
"Well, what did they do?"
"I thought it was the end of us. Suddenly they all started talking together. Then one of them came up to Challenger. You'll smile, young boy. This old ape man he was their chief looked like Challenger. He had short body, big shoulders, no neck, a great red beard, large eyebrows, and the What do you want, damn you!' look. Summerlee laughed till he cried. The ape men laughed too. Then they took us and carried through the forest. Soon we were in their town near the cliffs. There were about a thousand houses. There we lay under the tree, while a great ape man stood near us with a thick stick in his hand. When I say we I mean Summerlee and myself.
"Old Challenger was up in the tree. He was eating fruit and having the time of his life. Well, now, young boy, I'll tell you what will surprise you. You say you think there are people here. Well, we have seen the natives. Poor devils they were!!
"I think one side of this plateau is theirs but this part of the plateau is ape men's side. There is bloody war between them all the time. That's the situation, as I can see it. Well, yesterday the ape men caught about ten natives."
Lord Roxton went on with his story.
"Of course, as you said, they watched us from the beginning. You remember the great bamboos where we found the skeleton of the American? Well, that is just under the ape town, and that's the jumping off place of their prisoners. I think there are hundreds of skeletons there. The ape men have a parade ground in their town. They have a special ceremony there. One by one they push the poor prisoners down and see if the prisoners are broken to pieces or if they get the bamboos through them².
"In the morning the ape men came to the edge of the cliff. They pushed four of the Indians, and the bamboos went through them like knives through butter. It was horrible - but it was exciting too.
"Then we realized that we would be the next. It was time for us to escape. But I had to do everything myself, because Summerlee was weak and Challenger not much better. Besides, they still thought about science! They were having disputes all the time! Were the ape men a kind of dryopithecus of Java or a kind of pithecanthropus? Madness, I call it!
"Well, I learnt some good things about the ape men. They can't run as fast as we can. They have short legs and heavy bodies. They knew nothing about guns...
Then I ran away early this morning, got you and the guns, and here we are."
"But the professors!" I cried.
"Well, I couldn't bring them with me. Challenger was up the tree, and Summerlee was too weak for the escape. I had to get the guns. Of course, ape men can kill them. I don't think they would touch Challenger, but I am not sure about Summerlee. Now we must go back and save them."
We went in silence until we came to the cliff near the old camp. There we stopped, and Lord John told me his plan.
"When we are in the wood, ape men are our masters," he said. "They can see us but we cannot see them. But in the open it is different. There we can move faster. So we must keep ourselves to the open. The edge of the plateau has fewer trees. So that's our way. Go slowly; keep your eyes open and your gun ready. Above all, never let them get you prisoner that's my last word to you, young boy."
The woods were full of the ape men. Again and again we heard their voices. We hid among the bushes and walked very carefully. It took us about two hours to get to the ape men town.
"Come!" said Lord John. "Come quick! I hope we are not too late already!"
I shall never forget it - so impossible it was! It was a wide, open place covered with green grass. There were a lot of small houses. They were built of branches. I could see ape mothers with their babies.
Near the edge of the cliff, there were those red haired creatures, many of them of great size, and all of them horrible to
look on. They were standing in a line. A small group of Indians were standing in front of them. The Indians were little people and their skins looked like polished bronze in the strong sun light. A tall, thin white man was standing among them. That was Professor Summerlee.
Around this group of prisoners were some ape men, who watched them. Near the edge of the cliff, there were two funny figures. One of them was our Professor Challenger. His shirt was dirty, he had lost his hat, and his hair was flying wildly. Close to him stood the king of the ape men. They looked very much alike. The same short figure, the same heavy shoulders, the same long arms, the same hairy chest. He was an absurd parody of the Professor.
A drama was in progress. Two of the ape men took one of the Indians out of the group and brought him to the edge of the cliff. The king gave a signal. They caught the man by his leg and arm, and threw him down the cliff. As he disappeared, the ape men ran up to the cliff. There was a long pause of absolute silence. A mad cry followed! They jumped and clapped their long, hairy hands.
Summerlee was the next. Two ape men caught him by the hands, Challenger turned to the king and asked to save his friend's life. But the ape man just shook his head and it was his last movement. Lord John's gun fired, and the king fell down on the ground.
"Shoot, son, shoot!" cried my companion.
You know, I'm not aggressive by nature. But now I jumped on my feet and fired my gun again and again. Both guards were shot dead and Summerlee was walking about. He couldn't realize that he was free. The ape men were running about in horror. They couldn't understand where this storm of death was coming from. They all ran to the trees.
Challenger took Summerlee by the arm, and they both ran towards us. Summerlee was at the end of his strength. He could hardly walk. Challenger and I took Summerlee, one at each side. Lord John fired his gun again and again. We could see the ape men's heads looking at us out of the bushes. For a mile or more they followed us. But finally they learned our power². When we reached the camp, we looked back and found ourselves alone.
But we were mistaken. When we closed our gates, we heard somebody coming up and then a gentle crying from outside. Lord Roxton opened the gate and there, on the ground, lay the little red figures of the four Indians. One of them got up and pointed to the woods. He tried to explain that they were full of danger. He threw his arms round Lord John's legs.
"Oh dear!" cried Lord John, "What should we do with these people?"
"We must help them," said Summerlee. "I think we should take them home, but we don't know the way."
"There is no difficulty about that," said I. "They live in the caves on the other side of the central lake."
That moment, from the dark of the woods we heard a far away cry of the ape men. The Indians got very frightened.
"We must move, and move quick!" said Lord John. "You help Summerlee, young boy. The Indians will carry our food, cameras and everything. Now, come along before they can see us."
Deep in the wood we found a hiding place. All day we heard the cries of the ape men, but none of them came our way, and we had a long, deep sleep.

Chapter Nine
Those Were the Great Victories

We thought that the ape men knew nothing of our hiding place, but we were wrong. I shall never be nearer death than I was that morning.
We woke tired out. Summerlee was very weak. It was difficult for him even to stand but he was full of courage. We decided to have our breakfast first, and then make our way across the plateau and round the central lake to the Indian caves. We hoped that the Indians would give us a warm welcome.
Then, we would think of our return. Even Challenger was sure that our mission was finished and we had to carry our discoveries to the civilization.
The Indians were small people, fit, active, and well built, with straight black hair. Their faces were hairless, well formed, and good-humored. They pointed to each other and repeated
the word "Accala" many times. So we decided that it was the
name of their people. From time to time, when their faces went
white with fear and hatred, they pointed their hands at the wood and cried: "Doda! Doda!" It was their word for the ape men.
"What do you think of them, Challenger?" asked Lord John. "The young man is a chief among them, isn't he?"
The young man was the youngest, but he looked very proud and when Challenger touched his head, he moved away from the Professor with a quick look of his dark eyes. Then he said the word "Maretas" some times.
Then Professor Challenger took the nearest Indian by the shoulder and started to lecture on him. "We must place these natives higher than many South American tribes. We can't explain the evolution of such a race in this place. But it is clear that all of them couldn't develop on the plateau."
"Then where did they come from?" asked Lord John.
"I am sure that we will discuss the question in Europe and America," the Professor answered. "In this unusual country old types of animals live in company with newer ones. So we find such modern creatures as the tapir, the great deer and the reptilian forms of Jurassic type. And now come the ape men and the Indians. I believe they came from outside. Perhaps, there existed ape men in South America. A long time ago they found the way to this place, and developed into these terrible creatures. As to the Indians, I think they are later immigrants. But we don't know what made them come up here. When they met dreadful creatures, living in this country, they hid in the caves. Now they have endless fights with them. That's why there are not many of them."
When the lecture was over I found that one Indian had left our hiding place.
"He has gone to bring some water," said Lord Roxton.
"To the old camp?" I asked.
"No, to the river. It's among the trees there."
"I'll go and look after him," said I.
I was making my way through the bushes, when I saw something red. When I came up to it, I found the dead body of the Indian. I gave a cry to warn my friends, and ran towards the body. The next moment, out of the thick green leaves two long muscular arms covered with reddish hair came out. I jumped backwards, but quick as I was¹, those hands were quicker. One hand caught the back of my neck and the other got my face. I looked up and saw a frightful face with cold light blue eyes. There was something hypnotic in those terrible eyes. The next moment the huge paw covered my face and little silvery bells sounded in my ears. Far off I heard the sound of a gun.
I woke up in our hiding place.
"You are safe, young boy," said Lord Roxton. "When I heard your cry I ran forward. But when I saw your head in its paws, I thought it was too late. The ape man dropped you and was quickly off."
It was clear now that the ape men knew our hiding place. So the sooner we got away from their neighbourhood, the better.
It was in the early afternoon that we started on our journey. The young chief was our guide. Behind him came the two Indians. Then we walked with our guns ready. As we started, we heard a sudden chorus of the ape men. Looking back we saw only the trees, but that long cry told us how many of our enemies hid among the trees. They didn't follow us. Soon we got into more open country.
In the late afternoon we reached the lake and our native friends cried happily. Over the glassy water there was a great flotilla of canoes. They were coming straight for the shore. In a moment a cry of happiness came from the people in them. They flew across the water, took their boats on the sand and ran up to us. Finally one of them, an old man, with a bracelet of shiny glass and a skin of some beautiful yellow coloured animal over his shoulders, ran forward and kissed the young man. He looked at us and asked some questions. Then he kissed each of us. Then all natives fell with their faces down. I felt uncomfortable, and I read the same feeling in the faces of Roxton and Summerlee, but Challenger looked like a flower in the sun.
The Indians were ready for the battle. Every man carried his spear and arrows. Their dark, angry looks at the woods, and the word "Doda," made it clear that this was a rescue party. The young man was the old chief's son.
In the evening they sat in a circle and had a council. Two or three natives spoke, and finally our young friend spoke. He used gestures and we could understand it all clearly.
"What is the use of returning home?" he said. "Sooner or later we'll have to do it. I have returned safe but there is no safety for any of us. We are armed now and ready." Then he pointed to us. "These strange men are our friends. They are great fighters, and they hate the ape men as we do. They command," here he pointed up to the sky, "the thunder and the lightning. When shall we have such a chance again? Let us go forward, and either die now or live for the future in safety?!"
The red men listened to him very carefully. When he finished, the old chief came to us, and asked us some questions. He was pointing to the woods. Lord John made a sign to wait for an answer. Then he turned to us.
"Well, what are you going to do?" said he; "I will go with the Indians. What do you say, young boy?"
"Of course I will come."
"And you, Challenger?"
"I will."
"And you, Summerlee?"
"If you are all going, I hardly see how I can not."
"Then we are ready," said Lord John, and he nodded and touched his gun.
It was too late for a start that night, so the Indians made a camp. On all sides their fires began to smoke. Some Indians disappeared into the jungle and came back with a young iguanodon before them. When they killed the reptile, we understood that these great creatures were their domestic animals. In a few minutes great pieces of meat were cooking over a dozen fires.
Summerlee fell asleep on the sand, but we decided to have a walk near the lake. We wanted to learn something more of this strange country. Twice we found pits of blue clay that for some reason excited Lord John. Challenger got very interested in a geyser, where some strange gas formed great bubbles.
"Gas, lighter than the air. The resources of Professor Challenger are not limited, my young friend. I'll show you how a great mind puts all Nature to its use." He smiled at us with some secret purpose, but would say no more.
There was nothing interesting for me on the shore. Our noises frightened all living creatures away. But it was different out on the water. It was full of strange life. Great black backs came up, and then down into the water. The sand banks were filled with ugly huge turtles, strange crocodiles, and one great flat creature like a moving carpet of black shiny leather. Here and there high snake heads went out of the water, rising and falling in graceful, swan like movements. One of these creatures appeared on the sand bank a few hundred yards away and we could see its ball like body behind the long snake neck.
"Plesiosaurus! A fresh - water plesiosaurus!" cried Summerlee. "We are the happiest zoologists!"
Early in the morning we started on our expedition. Often in my dreams I wanted to be a war correspondent. But I have never imagined it would be such a war!
At night many natives joined us. There were four or five hundred of us when we started in the morning. A small group went first, and behind them in a column we made our way up. Near the forest we divided into spear men and bowmen.
We didn't have to wait long for our enemy. A wild cry came from the wood and the ape - men ran out with sticks and stones. It was a foolish move, because the ape - men were slow of foot. The Indians were as active as cats. It was horrible to see the dreadful creatures with open mouths and shiny red eyes. They were running at their enemies, while arrow after arrow buried itself in their bodies.
But we were not so lucky when we came among the trees. The ape - men jumped out from the trees so quickly that the Indians often didn't have time to spear them. One of the ape - men broke Summerlee's gun into pieces and was going to attack Professor again. An Indian speared him into the heart. Other ape - men in the trees above us dropped down stones and wood.
Our guns were a great help to the natives. Then came the panic. Screaming wildly, the great creatures ran away in the wood. The natives cried in their wild voices and followed their enemies.
The ape - men were too slow to escape from the Indians, and from every side of the woods we heard their cries.
"It's over," said Lord John. "I think we can leave the tidying up to the Indians. Perhaps the less we see of it, the better we shall sleep."
When we were walking through the woods, we found the dead bodies of the ape men.
All the males were killed. The ape town was destroyed, the females and the young were driven away, and the long war reached its bloody end.
For us the victory was very important. We visited our camp and talked with Zambo.
"Go away, Misters, go away!" he cried. "The devil will get you if you stay up there."
"It is the voice of a clever one!" said Summerlee. "We have had adventures enough. From now on you should use all your energy to get us out of this horrible country and back to civilization."

Chapter Ten
Escape

The victory over the ape - men was very important to us. We became the masters of the plateau. We were like gods for the Indians. As far as we could understand their language, there was a tunnel down the cliffs. That was the way the ape - men, the Indians and Maple White with his friend reached the plateau. But the year before there was an earthquake, and a part of the tunnel fell in.
We returned with the Indians to their city and made our camp at the foot of their cliffs. The Indians were friendly but we had our guns ready.
We visited their caves, which were most wonderful places. We couldn't understand if the caves were made by man or by Nature. The openings were about eighty feet above the ground. And a large animal couldn't climb the long stone stairs that led to the caves. Inside they were warm and dry with grey walls decorated with many pictures of different animals.
We knew the huge iguanodons were kept as domestic ani-mals and we decided that man was the master of the plateau. Soon we discovered that it was not so.
The tragedy happened on the third day. Challenger and Summerlee went together to the lake where some of the natives were fishing. Lord John and I had stayed in our camp, while a number of the Indians were busy with their everyday business¹. Suddenly there was a loud cry. We heard the word "Stoa" and saw men, women and children running wildly for their homes.
We looked up and saw the Indians waving their arms and asking us to come up to their caves, We took our guns and ran out to see what the danger could be.
Suddenly from the nearest trees there came a group of twelve or fifteen Indians, running for their lives², and after them two dreadful monsters. They were the monsters that came to our camp and frightened me on my night journey. They looked like horrible toads. They had ugly fish like skins and moved in great jumps, but in size they were bigger than the largest elephant. We had never before seen them in the daylight. We stood shocked.
We had little time to watch them, because in a moment they got some Indians and killed them. The Indians were helpless.
We fired our guns but it had no effect on the monsters. They were reptiles and didn't care for pain³. But the noise of our guns slowed them and we had a little time to reach the stone steps leading to the caves.
When the two monsters reached the stairs, a rain of arrows came from every cave. In a minute they were feathered with
them, but they didn't feel any pain and went on climbing the stairs. But at last the poison worked. One of the monsters gave a deep cry and dropped to the ground. Then the other followed it. With cries of triumph the Indians came down from their caves and had a dance of victory round the dead bodies. That night they cut up the bodies, but they were not going to eat the meat, because the poison was still active. The great reptilian hearts lay there, beating slowly in horrible independent life. It was only on the third day that the dreadful things stopped beating.
We spent seven days in the Indian village. We never stopped thinking about the escape to the outer world. One fact we had discovered very quickly: the Indians didn't want to help us. In every other way they were our friends but when we asked them for help, we were met by a gentle "no". They smiled and shook their heads, and there was the end of it. It was only Maretas, the chief's son, who looked sadly at us and told us by his gestures that he wanted to help us. Since their triumph with the ape men the Indians looked on us as supermen.
Challenger went walking every morning and returned only in the evening. One day he led us down to his secret place and told us about his plans.
It was a small clearing in the center of a palm forest. There was a geyser there. Near it we saw a large balloon - that was the dried stomach of a great fish lizard. It took Professor Challenger about half an hour to fill it with natural gas.
Challenger was like a happy father looking at his first born child. It was Summerlee who first broke the silence2.
"You don't mean us to go up in that thing, Challenger?"
"I'd like to see how it works," said Lord John.
"So you will," said Challenger. "Well, we cannot climb down and there is no tunnel. We cannot construct any kind of
bridge. Once I found some free hydrogen coming from the geyser. Then I had an idea of a balloon. It took me some time to find a bag for the gas, but finally I found the solution! I will demonstrate my balloon."
Never was our expedition in greater danger. The balloon flew up. In a moment Challenger went up after it. I had just time to throw my arms round his body. So I flew up into the air too. Lord John got my legs, but I felt that he also was coming off the ground. For a moment I imagined the four of us flying like sausages over the plateau. Then we heard a sharp crack, and we fell on the ground. When we got up, we saw our balloon far away in the deep blue sky.
I tried to write down all events as they happened. Now I am finishing my story from the old camp in company with Zambo. We came down in a most unexpected way.
It was in the evening of our risky adventure with Challenger's balloon. I told you that the young boy was the only person who wanted to help us. That evening he came down to our little camp. Suddenly he gave me a small piece of bark, and pointed up at the caves. Then he put his finger to his lips as a sign of secrecy.
I took the bark and we examined it together. It looked like a puzzle.
"My God!" Lord John cried. "I believe I've got it. See here! How many marks are on that paper? Eighteen. There are eighteen cave openings above us!"
"He pointed up to the caves when he gave it to me," said I.
"Well, this is a plan of the caves. What! Eighteen of them, some short, some deep, some branching. It's a map, and here's a cross on it. What's the cross for? I think it shows the deepest."
"Or one that goes through," I cried.
"I believe our young friend is right," said Challenger. "If the cave does not go through, I do not understand why the boy has drawn it. But if it does go through and comes out, we will have about a hundred feet way down."
"Well, our rope is still more than a hundred feet long," I cried. "Surely we could get down."
"How about the Indians in the cave?" Summerlee asked.
"There are no Indians in any of the caves above our heads," said I. "They don't use those caves for living. Let's go up there now!"
We made our way up to the cave that was marked in the drawing. It was a beautiful dry tunnel. The grey walls were covered with native symbols. There was white sand on the floor. We went on and on until we came to a wall. There was no escape for us there.
"Never mind, my friends," said Challenger. "You have still my promise of a balloon."
"Not a word about the balloon! Can we be in the wrong cave?" I asked.
"No," said Lord John, with his finger on the plan. "Seven teenth from the right and second from the left. This is the right cave."
I looked at the mark to which his finger pointed, and I gave a sudden cry.
"I think I've got it! Follow me! Follow me! Look, it is marked as a forked cave, and in the darkness we didn't see it."
We went about thirty yards and a great black opening appeared in the wall. We turned into it and came into a much larger corridor. We went our way and suddenly, in the black
darkness in front of us we saw a dark red light. No sound, no warmth, no movement came from it, but still the great light was ahead.
"The moon!" cried Lord John. "We are through, boys! We are through!!"
The full moon shone down on us. It was a small opening, not larger than a window. As we looked down, we could see that the way down was not very difficult. We understood that with the help of our rope we could find our way down. Then we returned to our camp.
We had to do everything quickly and secretly. We couldn't take everything we had, but Challenger had something that he wanted to take with him. When the darkness fell, we got our things up. Then we looked back and took one last long look at that strange land, our dreamland, a land where we had done much, suffered much, and learned much - our land, as we shall ever call it. When we were looking back, a call of some wild animal rang clear out of the darkness. It was the very voice of Maple White Land saying us good-bye. We turned and came into the cave that led to the outer world.
Two hours later, we were at the foot of the cliff. In the early morning we reached it and saw about ten fires, not just one. There were twenty Indians who came to save us. The next day we began our way back to the Amazon.
And so I finish my story. Our eyes have seen great wonders and each of us has become better in his own way. My dear Mr. McArdle, I hope very soon to shake you by the hand.

Chapter Eleven
A procession!

We couldn't imagine that we were so popular in Europe. On our way to England we started to get radio messages. They wanted to pay a lot of money for a short report about our expedition. But we decided to give no information to the Press before the meeting at the Zoological Institute.
And now I'm going to tell you about the last exciting moment of our adventure. I mean the meeting at the Zoological Institute. In front of me there is a newspaper report. I'll give you a chance to read it:
THE NEW WORLD GREAT MEETING AT THE QUEEN ' S HALL
WHAT WAS IT? DEMONSTRATION IN REGENT STREET
(SPECIAL)

"The meeting at the Zoological Institute was held last night. It has become a red letter date in the history of Science. Last year the Institute sent an expedition to South America. They had to test Professor Challenger's words about the existence of prehistoric life. The meeting was a sensation. Nobody will forget it.
"The Great Hall were full that night. About five thousand people came to see the travellers. At last they appeared and took their places in the front of a platform. In the Hall you could see the faces of famous scientists from all over the world.
"I'm not going to describe the heroes because their photo - graphs are in all newspapers. When the audience took their seats, the Chairman addressed the meeting. He said: ' Professor Summerlee is going to tell us about the results. I know that the expedition was very successful. Fortunately the age of romance is not dead. Now the wildest imagination met the scientific results.'
"Professor Summerlee told the audience how it all began. He also said some nice and hearty words about Challenger. Then he described their way from the Amazon to the base of the cliffs. It was very difficult to find the way up the plateau. The fall of their bridge was a real tragedy. Then the Professor described the horrors and the wonders of the Lost World. He told of the wonderful animal and plant life. The audience was very interested in the larger extinct animals. The Professor read a long list of their names. He and his companions saw about twenty creatures.
"He told about a snake, the skin of which, deep purple in colour, was fifty - one feet long. Professor told about a white creature which gave bright phosphorescence in the darkness; also a large black butterfly, the bite of which was deadly poisonous.
The plateau was very rich in prehistoric forms of early Jurassic times. He also told about the gigantic stegosaurus (Malone had met the monster at a drinking - place near the lake); the iguan-odon and the pterodactyl (two of the first of the wonders, which they had met); the terrible meet - eating dinosaurs (which had hunted them); about the huge and dreadful bird, the phororachus, and the great deer which still lives there. But the mysteries of the central lake were unbelievable! The Professor described the monstrous three-eyed fish lizards and the huge water snakes, which live in this mysterious lake.
"Next he told about the Indians, and the colony of ape - men. Finally he described the genius but very dangerous invention of Professor Challenger. Finally he told about their way back to civilization.
"Some people thought that that was the end of the meeting. But suddenly Dr. James Illingworth stood up. First Dr. Illingworth thanked Professor Challenger and Professor Summerlee. But then he asked for the proofs. Some photographs. But they may be fakes. What more? A story of a quick escape by ropes. It was exciting, but it proves nothing. The audience heard that Lord John Roxton had the skull of a phororachus. Can the audience have a look at it?
"It is difficult to describe that chaos. A large part of the audience was shouting. Suddenly Professor Challenger was on his feet:
' I think you can remember, that the same foolish scenes happened at the last meeting. Now I'm going to show you some proofs. As Professor Summerlee explained, the ape men destroyed our cameras. We couldn't bring a lot of luggage with us but we have Professor Summerlee's collections of butterflies and insects. There are many new species. Was it not a proof?"
(Several voices, ' No.') ' Who said no?'
"Dr. Illingworth (rising): ' We think that you could make such a collection in any place.'
"Professor Challenger: ' I can show you a picture of pterodactyl taken from life...'
"Dr. Illingworth: ' No picture.'
"Professor Challenger: ' You would like to see the prehistoric thing with your own eyes?"
"Dr. Illingworth: ' Yes, Sir.'
"Professor Challenger: ' And then you will believe it?'
"Dr. Illingworth (laughing): ' You are right, sir.'
"It was the sensation! Professor Challenger gave a signal and at once Mr. Malone stood up and went to the back of the platform. A moment later two men carried in a large box. Finally they put it in front of the Professor. All sound stopped. Professor Challenger opened the box. He looked down into the box and said, ' Come, then, pretty, pretty!' in a sweet voice. A moment later, a most horrible creature appeared from it and sat on the box. Nobody noticed the fall of the Duke of Durham into the orchestra... The face of the creature was like the wildest dream. It was horrible, with two small red eyes. Its long half opened beak was full of shark like teeth. It was the devil of our childhood! Someone cried, two ladies fell from their chairs. For a moment there was danger of a general panic.
"Professor Challenger tried to quiet the audience, but his movement frightened the creature. The strange shawl round its shoulders suddenly spread. It was a pair of leathery wings. The Professor tried to catch it by its legs, but it was too late. The monster was flying slowly round the Hall with a dry, leathery sound of its wings. A dreadful smell filled the hall. The cries of the people frightened the creature. Faster and faster it flew. It got afraid and was beating against the walls and lamps. It was trying to escape. ' The window! Shut that window!' cried the Professor. But it was too late! In a moment the creature, like a huge butterfly, came to the open window and was gone.
"Then oh! How can I describe what happened then everyone was on his feet. Everyone was moving and shouting.
' Up with them! up with them!' cried a hundred voices. In a moment the four travellers were above the crowd. ' Regent Street! Regent Street!' cried the voices. The audience left the Hall, carrying the four on their shoulders. Out in the street a hundred thousand people were waiting. ' A procession! A procession!' was the cry. The whole central traffic of London was stopped. Finally, the four travellers were near Lord John Roxton's house. It was one of the most wonderful evenings!"
Some words about the London pterodactyl. Two women saw it sitting on the roof of the Great Hall. The creature stayed there like a statue for some hours. The next day a newspaper article told about an officer. He had left his post, and was sent to prison. He said that he had dropped his gun and left his post because he suddenly saw the devil between him and the moon. The judges didn't believe the poor. There is one more report. The captain of the "Start Point", an American ship, reported that when they had just left the port something between a flying goat and a monstrous bat was flying very quickly southwest. The scientists believe that somewhere in the waters of the Atlantic the last European pterodactyl found its end.
And Gladys - oh, my Gladys! - Gladys of the mystic lake!
Let me tell it in a few words. No letter or telegram waited for me, and I went to her house at my first night in England. Was she dead or alive? Where were all my dreams of the open arms, the smiling face, her sweet words for me? I ran down the garden, knocked at the door, heard the voice of Gladys inside, and ran into the sitting room. She was sitting in the armchair.
"Gladys!" I cried, "Gladys!"
Her face was new to me.
"What do you mean?" she said.
"Gladys!" I cried. "What is the matter? You are my Gladys, are you not - little Gladys Hungerton?"
"No," said she, "I am Gladys Potts. Let me introduce you to my husband."
How absurd life is! I said "How do you do?" to a little red haired man.
"You didn't get my letter at Para, then?" she asked.
"No, I got no letter."
"Oh, what a pity! Well, I told William all about you," said she. "We have no secrets. I am so sorry about it. But I think your feeling was not so deep. You left me and went to the other end of the world. You're not angry with me, are you?"
"No, no, not at all. I think I'll go."
I had already left the room but suddenly I came up to that little man.
"Will you answer a question?" I asked. "How did you do it? Have you found hidden treasure, or discovered a pole, or flown the Channel, or what? Where is the romance? How did you get it?"
He looked at me with a hopeless little face.
"Well, just one question," I cried. "What are you? What is your profession?"
"I am a clerk," said he. "Second man at Johnson and Merivale's, 41 Chancery Lane."
"Good-night!" said I, and came out, with hatred and laughter.
One more episode. Last night we all met at Lord John Roxton's house, and sitting together we talked our adventures over. It was strange to see the old, well-known faces in the old English house. After supper Lord John Roxton had something to say to us. From a cupboard he took an old cigar box and put it on the table.
"There's one thing," said he, "that I would like to tell you. Can you remember the day we found the lake of pterodactyls? Well, something in that place seemed strange to me. It was blue clay."
The Professors nodded.
"Well, in the whole world I remembered only one place where you could find blue clay. That was the great Diamond Mine of Kimberley - what? So I risked my life and one night I spent with a spade in my hand among pterodactyls. This is what I got."
He opened his cigar box, and we could see about twenty or thirty stones. They were of different sizes - from the size of beans to that of eggs.
"I brought them back, and on the first day in England I consulted about its price. It is minimum of two hundred thousand pounds. Of course they belong to all of us. Well, Challenger, what will you do with your fifty thousand?"
"I would like to found a private museum."
"And you, Summerlee?"
"I would retire from teaching."
"I'll start a new expedition," said Lord John Roxton, "to having another look at the dear old plateau. As to you, young boy, you will spend your money in getting married, won't you?"
"Not just yet," said I. "I think, I would go with you."

