The Stories about Sherlock Holmes

The Five Orange Pips

 1. Uncle Elia's Story

It is not easy to choose one of Sherlock Holmes's cases to tell you because they all are interesting or strange or mysterious. There is one of his last cases, which was so interesting in its details and surprising in its results that I'm going to tell you the story now.
It was the end of September 1887. My wife was visiting her aunt, so I was staying with my friend Sherlock Holmes in Baker Street. The weather was terrible that day. All the day the wind was blowing hard and it was raining heavily outside. Sherlock Holmes and Dr. Watson were spending a quiet evening together.
"Was that the door bell?" I asked. "Who can this be? Some friend of yours, perhaps?"
"No, I'm sure. If he comes on business in this weather, it's very important. Come in!" said Holmes.
A good-looking young man came in. He was wet, tired and worried.
"You have come far?" asked Holmes.
"Yes, from Horsham. I have come for advice."
"You get it easily."
"And help."
"Ah - that is not always so easy."
"I have heard of you, Mr. Holmes, and a friend has sent me to you. He says that you know everything..."
"He said too much. Well, sit down and tell me, if you can, all I need to know."
The young man sat down, and put his wet feet near the fire.
"My name is John Openshaw. I think it is better to begin my story from some facts of my family. My father, Joseph, had a brother, Elias, who went to live in America when he was young. He became a planter in Florida and at the time of war he fought in Jackson's army. He didn't like the black Americans, but during the Civil War he fought against the men from the North, and with those from the South. When the war was over he returned to his plantation for three or four years. But the South lost the war, and there was equality for black people. About 1869 or 1870 he came back to England with a lot of money and bought a comfortable house near Horsham.
"He had no family and was a strange, unhappy man. He didn't want any friends and he often drank a lot. But he was kind to me and when I was twelve, I came to live with him. When I was sixteen, I was quite a master of the house. I kept all the keys and could go where I liked and do what I liked.
But there was one room in the house which was always locked. Nobody could go there. Sometimes I looked through the keyhole and could see nothing but old boxes.
"One day Uncle Elias got a letter from the town of Pondicherry in India. 'Pondicherry stamp! What can this be? I have no friends there,' he said and opened the letter. Out there jumped five little dried orange pips. They fell on his plate. I began to laugh at this and stopped suddenly because I saw my uncle's white face. ' K.K.K.!' he cried. ' Oh my God, my God, they have found me!' ' What is it, uncle?' I cried. ' Death,' he said and ran upstairs.
"I looked at the envelope. It had three Ks on its back. There was no letter inside. Who sent it? And why was my uncle so frightened?
"I left the breakfast table. When I was going upstairs, I met my uncle coming down. He had a large key in one hand, and a small black box in the other.
' They may do what they like, but I will win in the end,' he said angrily. ' Tell Mary ' she was his servant ' that I want her to light a fire in my room today, and send for Fordham, my lawyer.'
"When Fordham arrived, they both went up to uncle's bedroom. They spent there a lot of time and at last asked me to come in. The fire was burning brightly, and all around it there was black burnt paper. The small box with three Ks on it was open and there was nothing inside.
' John,' my uncle said, ' I know that I'm going to die soon. My brother, your father, will have all my money and my house after my death, and you will have it when he dies. I hope you can enjoy it. If you find you cannot, take my advice and leave everything to your worst enemy. I don't know what is going to happen... I'm afraid that my money brings death with it.'
"I couldn't understand what he meant, but I felt the danger, Surprisingly, nothing dangerous happened for a few weeks. Nothing happened to change our lives and we lived our usual quiet life. But I saw a change in my uncle. He started to drink a lot and every day he shut himself away in his room, he didn't want to see anyone. One day he drank too much and ran wildly out of the house. He was running about the garden with a gun in his hand, shouting out that he was afraid of no man. Then, suddenly frightened, he ran back into the house, and into his room, locking himself in again.
"One night I heard a cry. I got up out of my bed and ran to my uncle's room. The door was open, the room was empty.
"In the morning we found him at the far end of the garden, face downwards ', in a very small lake. He was dead. The police said he killed himself but I knew he was afraid to die, so I didn't think it was true."
Holmes stopped the young man for a minute.
"One moment," he said. "When did your uncle get a letter from India and when did he die?"
"The letter arrived on March 10, 1883. He died seven weeks later, upon the night of May 2nd."
"Thank you. Please, go on."
"After my uncle's death, my father moved into the house. Of course I asked him to look carefully at the locked room but we didn't find anything important. All we found was the small box. It was empty, and had a piece of paper with three Ks and the words ' Letters and Receipts ' written on it."

 2. Five More Pips

"So we lived in the uncle's house. On the fourth day after the New Year I heard my father's cry of surprise when we were sitting at the breakfast table. I looked at him and saw five orange pips in his hand and an open letter.
"He always laughed at my story of Elias and the five orange pips, but now he looked puzzled and even frightened.
' What does it mean, John?' he said in a low voice. His face was white.
' Look! There's K. K. K. on the letter,' he said. We were afraid.
' So the letter says. Here are the letters K. K. K. It also tells me to leave the papers in the garden. What papers?"
' The papers in the Uncle Elias's box. But he burnt them!'
' Well, where does the letter come from? From Dundee in Scotland,' he said. ' Why do they write to me about papers?' said my father.
' You must tell the police.'
' No, they will laugh at me. Let's forget about it.'
"Three days later my father went to see his friend who lived some miles away. I thought he would be safer away from home. But I was wrong.
"On the second day I got a letter from his friend asking me to come at once. The police said that my father was walking home in the dark when he fell down a hill. He was badly hurt and died soon after. They decided it was an accident, but I didn't agree.
"But I was sure it was not. I thought it was a murder, and I couldn't forget the five orange pips and the strange letters to my uncle and my father.
"Now I was the one to own the house. I have lived alone in that house for nearly three years now. Then yesterday I got this."
"The young man showed us the letter with K.K.K. on it and five small orange pips inside.
"You see? It comes from London, and it says ' Leave the papers in the garden.' Those are the words that were in the letter to my father."
"What did you do next?" asked Holmes.
"Nothing," answered John. "I don't know what to do. I am too afraid."
"Nothing?" cried Holmes. "Young man, you are in greatest danger!"
"I have talked to the police," said Openshaw sadly. "But they laughed at me. They say there is nothing to worry about."
"How stupid they are!" cried Holmes. "Why did you come to me and why did you not come at once? Haven't you found anything which can help us?"
"Well, I found this paper in the locked room," said John and gave us a small piece of half burnt paper. It said:
4th. Hudson came. Same old platform.
7th. Set the pips on McCauley, Paramore, and John Swain, of St. Augustine.
9th. McCauley cleared.
10th. John Swain cleared.
12th. Visited Paramore. All well.
"Thank you," said Holmes as he gave the paper back to John. "And now, we haven't got time even to talk. You must go home at once and act."
"What shall I do?"
"There is only one thing to do. You must put this piece of paper that you've shown us into the box. You must also put in a note to say that your uncle burned all the other papers. Then leave the box in the garden. Do you understand?"
"Yes, yes."
"We must first get you out of danger."
"Thank you," said John. "I shall do as you say. I shall see you at Horsham, then?" said John.
"No. Your secret hides in London. It is there that I shall look for it."
"Then I shall call on you in a day, or in two days, with news of the box and papers." And with those words, John went out into the dark night, the wind and the rain.

 3. Some More Deaths

Sherlock Holmes sat for some time in silence and watched the fire. Then he smoke his pipe and watched the blue smoke rings as they came up to the ceiling.
"I think, Watson," he said at last, "that of all our cases, this is the most fantastic."
"Well, yes, John Openshaw is walking among great dangers, and we cannot say what these dangers are. Who is this K. K. K. and why does he hate this unhappy family?"
Holmes closed his eyes and said slowly: "The ideal reasoner can guess what happens next after he studies just one episode carefully. He can also guess the result which would follow. He can work in his study but he has to use all the knowledge he can get from around. If I remember right, in the early days of our friendship, you made a document..."
"Yes, it was a wonderful document. Philosophy, astronomy, and politics were marked at zero, I remember. Botany - a little better, geology - rather deep (you know where each mud stain comes from), chemistry eccentric, anatomy - unsystematic, sensational literature and crime records² - unique, violin player, boxer, lawyer, and smoker. Those, I think, were the main points."
Holmes smiled and said:
"Well, I say now, as I said then, that a man should keep in his head the information he needs every day, but the other knowledge he should put away, where he can get it if he wants it. Now, for this case we should use all our resources. Can you give me the American Encyclopedia which stands on the shelf
over there? First of all we may guess that Elias Openshaw had some very strong reason for leaving America. Men of his age do not change their way of life and leave the warm climate of Florida for the English one. It means that he was afraid of something. That's why he lived a lonely life and locked all his doors so carefully. But what was he afraid of? The only things that can help us are the letters. Now where did those letters come from? Did you see?"
"The first was from Pondicherry, the second from Dundee, and the third from London."
"Does that tell you anything?"
"They are all sea ports. Probably the writer was on a ship."
"Very good, my dear Watson. Elias got a letter from Pondicherry in India and seven weeks later he was killed. John's father got a letter from Dundee in Scotland and he was killed only three or four days later. What does that mean?"
"I can't see, my dear Watson."
"Well, I think that the letter came by steam ship, but a sailing ship (that is much slower) brought the killer."
"It's possible," said I.
"Do you see why I'm worried now? And now you see the danger that John Openshaw is in. This letter comes from London and it means the killer is in London too."
"Oh!" cried I. "What can it mean, this endless killing?"
"The papers Elias Openshaw brought with him from America are very important to the killer or killers. I think that there are two or three people, and they want to get the papers back. So I think K. K. K. belong to the name of an organization, not the name of a person..."
"But of what organization?"
"Have you never..." Sherlock Holmes was talking in a low voice "have you never heard of the Ku Klux Klan?"
"I never have."
Holmes opened the American Encyclopedia and said: "Here it is:
Ku. Klux. Klan. It sounds like the rifle getting ready to fire, This terrible secret organization started in the Southern States after the Civil War. They didn't want black Americans to have the same rights as white Americans. They killed anyone who didn't agree with them. To anyone who made them angry, they sent a warning. It usually was melon or orange pips. From then on he wasn't safe anywhere. He was waiting for death. Their way of working was so good that they were always successful. The American government couldn't end the years of terror until 1869."
"Yes," said I, "and 1869 was the year before Elias Openshaw came to England. He brought all their papers with him in the black box, so the organization could not go on. Of course they wanted to get the papers back. The burnt piece of paper we have seen, with its dates and names of when and to whom the orange pips were sent, are a great danger to the person who has it."
Holmes said, "We can do no more tonight. I believe that the only chance that Openshaw has is to do what I have told him."
The next morning the sun was shining, and Sherlock Holmes was at breakfast when I came down to him. I sat at the table and opened the newspaper.
"Holmes!" I cried and read to him:
"Between nine and ten last night a policeman heard a cry for help near Waterloo Bridge, Then he heard someone fall into the river. The people tried to help the poor but the night was too dark. Later the police took a body from the river. A letter found in his pocket showed that it was a man named Openshaw."
We sat in silence.
"That hurts me, Watson," Holmes said at last. "It really hurts me. That young man came to me for help, and I sent him away to his death! Now I'm going to find them, if it's the last thing I do!"
He walked up and down the room. Finally he went out of the house in a hurry and I didn't see him till evening. When Holmes came in, he was very tired and hungry but very pleased.
"Watson! I know the names of Openshaw's enemies! I'm going to send them a surprise! It will frighten them!"
"What do you mean?"
He had an orange in his hand. Holmes took out the pips and put five of them in a letter. On it he wrote:
Captain James Calhoun Sailing Ship "Lone Star", Georgia.
"And who is this captain?" I asked.
"He is the leader of these devils. I shall get the others too, but he is the first. I have spent all the day at the port of London and studied hundreds of the ship's papers. Only the ' Lone Star ' was in the three ports at the right times, and this morning she left London to sail back to Georgia. There are three Americans on board, I also found out that all three of them were away from the ship last night. They are the killers."
"When they arrive in Georgia, the steam ship will be there and the American police will get the other letter and get them."
Poor Sherlock Holmes! His plans came to nothing. He could do nothing about the weather. The winter storms were worse than ever, so the "Lone Star" never arrived in America. And the killers of John Openshaw never got the orange pips, but, in the end, death came to them.

