Hans Christian Andersen

The Marsh King's Daughter

Part 1

The storks tell their little ones many stories, and they are all about moors and reed banks, and suited to their age. The youngest of them are quite satisfied with " kribble, krabble," or such nonsense, and think it great. But the elder ones want something with a deeper meaning, or at least something about their own family.
We know one of the longest and oldest stories which the storks tell. It has been repeated from mouth to mouth, from one stork mother to another, for thousands of years. Each stork has told it better than the last. And now we plan to tell it better than all.
The first stork pair who told it lived at the time it happened. They had their nest on the roof of the Viking ' s house, which stood near the wild moor lands of Wendsyssell. That is, to speak more correctly, the great moor land, high up in the north of Jutland. This moor land is still an immense area of marshy ground, about which we can read in the " Official Directory". It is said that in old times the place was a lake. Now the moor land extends for miles in every direction. It is surrounded by damp meadows, dangerous swamps, and marshy ground covered with turf, on which grow bilberry bushes and short trees. There are almost always thick fogs over this region, which, seventy years ago, was full of wolves. It may well be called the Wild Moor. One can easily imagine, with such great marsh and lake, how lonely and sad it was a thousand years ago.
Many things may be noticed now that existed then. The reeds grow to the same height,
and have the same kind of long, purple brown leaves, with their feathery tips. There still stands the birch, with its white bark and its delicate, loosely hanging leaves. The flies still wear a thin dress of the same cut, and the favourite colours of the stork are white, with black and red for stockings. The people, certainly, in those days, wore very different dresses to those they now wear. But if any of them, be he a rich man or a poor one, master or servant, stepped on the marshy ground of the moor, they met with the same fate a thousand years ago as they do now. The poor fellow sank, and went down to the Marsh King, as he is called. The Marsh King rules in the waters of the great moor land empire. They also called him "Swamp King," but we like the name of "Marsh King" better, and we will give him that name as the storks do. Very little is known of the Marsh King's rule, but that, perhaps, is a good thing.
Near the moor lands, and not far from the North Sea, there was the castle of the Viking. It was built of wood, and it had three storeys. There was also a tower and stone cellars. On top of the roof the stork had built his nest. There the stork mother sat on her eggs and felt sure her hatching would come to something.
One evening, the stork father stayed out rather late, and when he came home he seemed quite busy and important. "I have something awful to tell you," he said to the stork mother.
"Keep it to yourself then," she said. "Remember that I am hatching eggs. It may upset me, and will affect them."
"You must know it at once," he said. "The daughter of our host in Egypt has arrived here. She has the courage to take this journey, and now she is lost."
"She, who is from the race of the fairies, is it?" cried the stork mother. "Oh, tell me all about it. You know I do not like to be kept waiting at a time when I am hatching eggs."
"Well, you see, mother," he said, "she believed what the doctors said, that the moor flowers which grow about here would heal her sick father. She has flown to the north in swan ' s plumage, in company with some other swan princesses, who come to these parts every year to renew their youth. She came, and where is she now!"
"You enter into particulars too much," said the stork - mother, "and the eggs may take cold."
"Well," he said, "this evening I went among the reeds, and while I was there three
swans came. Something in their manner of flying seemed to say to me, ' Look carefully now. There is one not all swan, only swan ' s feathers.' You know, mother, you have the same intuitive feeling that I have. You know whether a thing is right or not immediately."
"Yes, of course," she said; "but tell me about the princess. I am tired of hearing about the swan ' s feathers."
"Well, you know that in the middle of the moor there is something like a lake," said the stork father. "You can see the edge of it if you raise yourself a little. Just there, by the reeds and the green banks, lay the stump of on old
tree. On this stump the three swans stood flapping their wings, and looking about them. One of them threw off her plumage, and I immediately recognized her as one of the princesses of our home in Egypt. There she sat, without any clothes. Only her long, black hair covered her body. I heard her tell the two others to take great care of the swan ' s plumage, while she dipped down into the water to get the flowers which she thought she saw there. The others nodded, and picked up the feather dress. I wonder, what will become of it? I thought this, and she most likely asked herself the same question. If so, she received an answer,
a very practical one. The two swans rose up and flew away with her swan ' s plumage. ' Dive down now!' they cried. You will never more fly in the swan ' s plumage. You will never again see Egypt. Here, on the moor, you will remain.' And with these words they tore the swan ' s plumage into a thousand pieces, and then the two deceitful princesses flew away."
"Why, that is terrible," said the stork mother. "I feel as if I could hardly bear to hear any more, but you must tell me what happened next."
"The princess burst into tears. Her hot tears fell on the stump, which was really
tears fell on the stump, which was really not a stump at all but the Marsh King himself, who lives and rules in marshy ground. I saw myself how the stump of the tree turned round, and was a tree no more. The long branches like arms were extended from it. Then the poor child was terribly frightened, and started to run away. She tried to cross the green, slippery ground. But it cannot bear any weight, much less hers. She fell into the water and quickly sank, and the stump dived immediately after her. In fact, it was he who drew her down. Great black bubbles rose up, and with these every trace of the two disappeared. And now the princess is buried in the wild
marsh. And she will never now carry flowers to Egypt to cure her father."
"It is too bad that you told me this," she said, "at such a time as this. The eggs may suffer. But I think the princess will soon find help. Someone will try to help her."
"I want to go to the marsh every day," he said, "to see if anything happens." And so he did.
A long time passed, but at last he saw a green stalk growing out of the deep, marshy ground. As it reached the surface of the marsh, a leaf appeared, and then there was a bud.
One morning, when the stork - father was  flying over the stalk, he saw that the power of the sun's rays had made the bud open, and in the cup of the flower lay a charming child a little girl, looking as if she had just come out of a bath. The little one was so like the Egyptian princess, that the stork, at the first moment, thought it was the princess herself. Then he decided that it was much more likely to be the daughter of the princess and the Marsh King. This explained also that she lay in the cup of a water lily. "But she cannot be left to lie here," thought the stork, "and in my nest there are already so many. But stay, 
I have thought of something. The wife of the Viking has no children, and how often she has wished for a little one. People always say the stork brings the little ones. I will do so in earnest this time. I shall fly with the child to the Viking ' s wife. How glad she will be!"
And then the stork took the little girl from the flower cup, flew to the castle, and put the beautiful child on the bed of the Viking ' s wife. Then he flew back quickly to the stork mother and told her what he had seen and done. The little storks listened to it all, because they were then quite old enough to do so. "So you see," he continued, "that the princess is not dead. She has sent her little one up
here. And now I have found a home for her."
"Ah, I said it would be so long ago," said the stork mother. "But now think a little about your own family. Our travelling time is near, and I sometimes feel a little irritation already under the wings. The cuckoos and the nightingale are already gone, and the quails say they will go too as soon as the wind is favourable."


Part 2


