The Stories about Sherlock Holmes

A Scandal in Bohemia

 1. Holmes' Method and King's Mistake

To Sherlock Holmes she was always the Woman. He never told about her in any other words. Sherlock Holmes didn't feel any love for Irene Adler. He didn't feel love for anybody. He had too cold and too balanced mind. Sometimes he looked like a machine. He never spoke of love seriously. But there was one woman to him, and that woman was Irene Adler.
When I got married, I didn't see Holmes. My friend Sherlock Holmes went on living in his house in Baker Street. The study of crime that interested him! Sometimes I heard about his work and success from the newspapers but I really knew little of my dear friend.
One night it was on the 20th of March 1888 was coming home and my way led me through Baker Street. Suddenly I decided to see Holmes again. From the dark street I could see that his windows were bright. I saw his tall figure in one of them. He was walking around the room quickly, with his head down and his hands behind him. He was at work again! I rang the bell and came in.
I couldn't say he was very happy to see me, but he was glad, I think. He pointed at the armchair near the fire and at the box of cigars. Then he stood before the fire and looked at me carefully, in his own special way.
"You are happy with your wife, Watson, aren't you?" he said at last. "I think that you have put on seven and a half pounds since I saw you."
"Seven!" I answered.
"No, a little more. And you work again, I see. You did not tell me that you wanted to work."
"Then, how do you know?"
"I see it, I deduce it. How do I know that you got very wet a day or two ago, and that your servant is not a good one?"
"My dear Holmes," said I, "this is too much. It is true that I had a country walk on Thursday. I came home absolutely wet. But now I am wearing different clothes. How do you deduce it? As to Mary Jane, my servant... my wife told me many times, but again I can't understand how you work it out³."
He smiled and rubbed his long, nervous hands together.
"It is easy, believe me," said he, "there are some parallel cuts on your left shoe. It means that the person who cleaned the shoes was careless. How did I work out that you started medical practice? Well, a gentleman walks into my rooms smelling of medicine, with a hidden stethoscope in his hat. Who is he? It's not a difficult question."
I smiled because his explanation of his famous process of deduction was fantastic! "When I listen to you," I said, "I always think that it is very easy. And each next time I am always shocked with the way it works."
"You are right," he answered and sat down into an armchair with a cigarette. "You see, but you do not observe. For example, you have often seen the steps from the hall to this room."
"Very often."
"How often?"
"Well, some hundreds of times."
"Then how many are there?"
"How many? I don't know."
"You have seen, but you have not observed. They are seventeen! You are interested in these little problems, aren't you? I think it will interest you." He gave me a thick, pink letter. "It came by the last post," said he. "Read it aloud."
It was a letter without a date, a name and an address.
"Tonight somebody will visit you, at a quarter to eight o'clock," it said, "a gentleman wants to consult you on a very secret business. You have helped some important people of royal families. You have shown that you are a noble man. We hope, you can help us, too. Get ready to see your visitor wearing a mask."
"This is a mystery," I said. "What do you think it means?"
"I have no idea because I have no facts. What do you deduce from it?"
I looked at the writing and the paper on which it was written.
"The man is rich," I said. "The paper is not cheap. It is very strong and white. It's strange paper. I have never seen such paper."
"It is not English paper at all. Look at it in the light! Can you see that it was made in Bohemia? I think that a German
wrote the letter. The word order is wrong, he put the words in the German way. Ah, here comes our visitor now."
"Shall I leave, Holmes?"
"No, no, I need your help. I think we'll hear something very interesting," said Holmes and we heard a strong knock at the door.
"Come in!" called Holmes.
A tall and strong man came into the room. He looked like Hercules in rich dress. "For an Englishman his dress is too rich and too bright," I thought. Besides, he was wearing a black mask.
"Have you got my letter?" he asked with a strong German accent.
"Please, take a seat," said Holmes. "I'm Sherlock Holmes. And this is my friend, Dr. Watson. He helps me a lot in my cases. How can I call you, please?"
"You can call me Count Von Kramm. I come from Bohemia. My case is a secret one and very important. Will you and your friend keep it in a secret?"
"I will," we said together.
"A noble and important person from a royal family has sent me to you. He asks for help. I'm wearing a mask because nobody must know about my visit. If you can't help, there will be a great scandal in the Bohemian Royal Family."
"I know, Your Majesty," said Holmes. He was sitting in his armchair smoking a cigarette.
Our visitor jumped up from his chair. He started to go up and down the room, then stopped, took off his mask and threw it on the floor.
"You are right," he cried, "I am the King. But how do you know who I am? Yes, I am the King of Bohemia. I have come to consult you."
"Very well. Go on," said Holmes. He was sitting with his eyes closed and listening carefully.
"Five years ago I met Irene Adler. I think you know this name..."
"Let me see!" said Holmes. "Hum! Born in 1858. Famous singer, very beautiful, lives in London. Your Majesty, as I understand, loved her and wrote her some letters. Now you want to get them back."
"You are right. But how..."
"Did you marry here secretly?"
"No."
"I think, you can always say that you didn't write those letters, if she shows them."
"But my writing..."
"Copied."
"My paper."
"Stolen."
"My photograph."
"Bought."
"We were both in the photograph."
"Oh, dear!? That is very bad! That was a mistake, Your Majesty."
"I was madly in love, I was so young... But now I must get it back."
"Did you try to buy it?"
"She will not sell."
"Did you try to steal it?"
"We tried five times. But my men didn't find it."
Holmes laughed. "It is a very nice problem. What is she going to do with the photo?" said he.
"You know, when I left Irene Adler, she was very angry with me. Now she has a chance to ruin me. Soon I am going to marry Clotilde Lothman. She is the second daughter of the King of Scandinavia. This marriage is very important because we are from the most important royal families in Europe. If Clotilde knows about Irene and me, that will be a great scandal."
"And Irene Adler?"
"She says she will send the photograph to Clotilde ' s family. I am afraid she will keep her promise. We must find the photo before she sends it! We have three days yet."
"Oh, I am sure that we will find," said Holmes with a yawn. "Your Majesty will, of course, stay in London?"
"Certainly. You will find me at the Langham Hotel under the name of Count Von Kramm."
"Then I'll write to you to tell you what happens. And her address?" Holmes asked.
"Is Briony Lodge, Serpentine Avenue, St. John ' s Wood." "Then, good-night, Your Majesty," said Holmes. The King left and Holmes turned to me "Good-night, Watson. Please, come back tomorrow at 3 o'clock in the afternoon."

 2. Secret Marriage

At 3 o'clock I was at Baker Street, but Holmes was not at home. So I waited him in his study. It was about 4 o'clock when the door opened and a very strange person walked into the room. He was an old man with a red face and he looked drunk. He was wearing poor and rather old clothes. He came up to me but I had to look at him three times before I saw it was my friend - Holmes!
He smiled and went to the bathroom to change his clothes.
Ten minutes later an English gentleman was sitting in front of the fire and telling me his story.
"It's very funny. I've had a nice time, really! I left home at 8 o'clock this morning. I was wearing a servant ' s dress. I wanted to become friends with her servants. Servants are always happy to talk. Soon I found her house and walked round it. It is a lovely big house, with a garden at the back. Large sitting room on the ground floor, with long windows which are easy to open. I found some horsemen and heard a lot about the young woman Miss Adler.
"And what of Irene Adler?" I asked.
"Oh, she lives quietly, sings at concerts. She doesn't go out often but she has got a friend. He is Godfrey Norton, the lawyer. He is dark and handsome and visits her every day. Is she his client or his friend? Do they love each other? If he is her lawyer, perhaps she has given him the photograph. If they are in love, she won't show it to him. I want you to know the story in detail."
"Very interesting, Holmes!" I said.
"When I was there, a cab drove up to Miss Adler ' s house. Mr. Norton jumped out of it. He was in a great hurry, shouted to the cab man to wait and came in the house. He was in the house about half an hour, and then came out even in a greater hurry. ' Drive like the devil,' he shouted, ' to the Church of St. Monica!' Some minutes later Miss Adler ran out of her home and jumped into a cab. ' To the Church of St. Monica!' she cried. I had to follow them and jumped into a cab. When I arrived, I came into the church. There were three people there: Mr. Norton, Miss Adler and a churchman. When Mr. Norton saw me he ran up to me.
"Thank God," he cried. "Come! Come!"
"What then?" I asked.
"Come, man, come, only three minutes."
"So I helped Mr. Norton to marry Miss Adler. They had to find a witness and they found him. It was me, my dear Watson. A servant, a poor man was the best witness for their secret marriage. When they left the church he went to his work and she returned to her house. ' I'll be in the park at five as usual,' she said as she left him."
"So she married him! What shall we do now?" I said.
"First, we'll have something to eat. We are going to be very busy tonight. And I need your help, Watson. It is about 5 now. At 7 we must be there, near her house. Miss Irene returns from her drive at that time and we will meet her."
"And what then?"
"I'll do everything. But, remember, you must not interfere, come what may '. You understand?
"Perhaps something unpleasant will happen. Do not join in it. Then I'll get inside her house. You must wait outside near the sitting room window. Then the sitting room window will open."
"Yes."
"You must watch me."
"Yes."
"When I raise my hand - SO you will throw IT into the room and shout ' Fire!""
I took the small thing out of his hand.
"What is it, Holmes?" I asked.
"Don't be afraid, it's not a bomb, just a smoke - stick.
The room will quickly be full of smoke. Then you walk to the end of the street and wait for me there. Do you understand me?"
"OK, I'll do what you want," I said.

 3. Fire! Fire!

That evening Holmes again was wearing different clothes.
He had churchman clothes and a big black hat on. He changed his face, his hair, his manners he was a different man! The stage lost a fine actor, when he became a detective.
At about 6 o'clock we were near Miss Adler ' s house. The street was rather busy. A lot of people were smoking, talking and laughing there.
"You see," said Holmes to me, "the case has become less difficult after their marriage. I don't think Irene wants her husband to see the photo, so it is in a secret place in her house.
Now the question is, ' Where?' I am sure it is in her house."
"But the King's men tried to find it..."
"Yea, but they did not know how to look."
"But how will you look?"
"I will not look. She will show me. She will have to."
Then he suddenly stopped and pointed to the coming cab. One of the men in the street ran up to open the door. Perhaps, he wanted to get some money. Then another man ran up and pushed him away. They started shouting and fighting. Irene was in the middle of the fight. Holmes ran up to help the lady but suddenly he cried and fell to the ground. The blood was running down his face. Irene hurried to her house, but then stopped and looked back.
"How is the poor gentleman?" she asked.
"He is dead," cried some people.
"No, no, he is alive!" cried the others.
"Bring him into the sitting room. There is a comfortable sofa. This way, please!" said Irene.
Some people carried Holmes into the sitting room and put him on the sofa. I could see him through the window. I was watching him with the smoke stick in my hand.
Suddenly Holmes sat up on the sofa. He looked like a man who was in need of air. A servant ran to open the window. At
the same moment Holmes raised his hand and I threw the smoke stick into the room with a cry of "Fire!" The people in the street joined the cry: "Fire!" Thick clouds of smoke filled the room. I walked away to the corner of the street. In ten minutes Holmes came to meet me there.
"You did it very nicely, Doctor," he said.
"You have the photograph?"
"I know where it is. She showed me."
"But why did she show it to you?"
"It is easy," said he, laughing. "You, of course, saw that everyone in the street was helping me. I paid them some money for their help."
Now I could see.
"It wasn't a real fight. It wasn't real blood - just some red paint. It is an old trick. Then I got in her sitting room, asked for some fresh air and you had your chance."
"How did that help you?"
"You see, when a woman thinks that her house is on fire, she runs to the most important things her baby, her gold, her... photo. That's where she ran. The photograph is in a cupboard in her sitting room. I saw the photo. But I couldn't take it because I wasn't alone in the sitting room. I had nothing to do but² say some excuses and leave the house."
"And now?" I asked.
"I must send a telegram to the King right now. Tomorrow we'll come to the house with the King. We will come early when the lady is still in bed. When we are in the sitting room, the King will take the photo with his own hands. Then we will leave the house." That time we were walking along Baker Street. When we stopped near Holmes ' door, a thin young man was passing by.
"Good-night, Mister Sherlock Holmes," he said and hurried away.
"I've heard that voice before," said Holmes looking down the street. "But who was it?"

 4. Photo

I slept at Baker Street that night, and we were having our toast and coffee in the morning when the King of Bohemia ran into the room.
"You have really got it!" he cried, happily.
"Not yet."
"But you have hopes?"
"I have hopes."
"Then, come!"
On the way to Irene ' s house Holmes said to the King:
"Irene Adler is married."
"Married! When?"
"Yesterday. Her husband is Mr. Norton, an English lawyer."
"But I hope she doesn't love him."
"I do hope that she does."
"I don't understand why."
"If the lady loves her husband, she does not love Your Majesty. If she does not love Your Majesty, she will not ruin Your Majesty ' s plan."
A servant opened the door and asked:
"Mr. Sherlock Holmes?"
"I am Mr. Holmes," answered my friend. He looked very surprised.
"Mrs. Norton told me that you were going to come. She left this morning with her husband for the Continent."
"What!" Sherlock Holmes cried out. "Do you mean that she has left England?"
"You are right."
"What about the photo? All is lost!" cried the King.
"We shall see," said Holmes and we ran into the sitting room. Holmes opened the cupboard and took out a photo and a letter. The photograph was of Irene Adler herself in evening dress, the letter was addressed to "Sherlock Holmes". My friend opened it and we read it together.
"My Dear Mr. Sherlock Holmes,
You really did it very well. I thought that it was a real fire, and that you were a kind old man. But when I ran up to the cupboard and opened it to take the photo out... I began to think. I remembered those wonderful stories that my friends told me about you, the famous detective in London. I thought it was your trick! You know, I had your address and decided to find everything out myself. I dressed like a young man. I followed you to your door. I wanted to find out if you were Mr. Sherlock Holmes. Then I said ' good-night ' to you outside your door!
"My husband and I decided to leave England. The photo? Please, tell the King I will never show it to anybody. I love my husband and he loves me. Here is a different photo. The King can keep it, if he likes.
Irene Norton"
"What a woman!" cried the King of Bohemia, when we finished reading the letter. "Why didn't I marry her?"
"She is a very clever woman," said Holmes coldly. "I am sorry that I have not finished the case."
"No, no," cried the King. "The photo is safe now. I know that she never breaks her promises. I need nothing more than her word."
"I am glad to hear it."
"How can I thank you, dear Mr. Holmes?"
"Your Majesty, I would like to have just one thing," said Holmes.
"Tell me what it is."
"This photograph!"
The King looked at Holmes in surprise.
" Irene ' s photograph!" he cried. "Certainly, it is yours."
"I thank Your Majesty," Holmes turned away and we left.
And there was no scandal in the kingdom of Bohemia.
Holmes stopped telling jokes about woman's wit '. He always remembers Irene Adler - the woman who was cleverer than he was. And when he speaks of Irene Adler, he says she is the woman.

