Daniel Defoe
Robbinson Crusoe

Chapter 3.
Wrecked on a Desert Island

Xury and I decided to explore the island. I saw that the island was inhabited and,
finally, after ten days, we saw some people. They were quite black and naked.
I decided to have a talk with them but the people were really frightened of me
and didn't understand what I was trying to say. Therefore, as much as I could,
I tried to explain everything with signs. So, I made signs for something to eat.
Half an hour later, they brought two pieces of meat and some corn. We made signs
of thanks.

Suddenly, when Xury and I were lying by the shore, two mighty creatures appeared.
We saw that the people were terribly frightened, especially the women.


I loaded my gun, and asked Xury to load the others. As soon as the creature came
close to me, I fired and shot it directly in the head. It instantly sank down into
the water. The other one ran away.

The people were really shocked. But when they saw the creature dead and sunk in
the water, they took heart and dragged it on shore. We saw that it was a leopard,
spotted and fine. The negroes wished to eat the flesh of this creature, so I
presented it to them.

One beautiful morning I heard Xury cried out, 
"Master, master, a ship!"
That was a Portuguese ship. Three hours later, we managed to get close to it.
The sailors on board the ship tried to speak to me in Portuguese, and in Spanish,
and in French, but I didn't understand them. However, there was a Scottish sailor
who asked me who and what I was in English. I told him that I was and Englishman
and that I had escaped from slavery at Sallee.

So, they invited me to go on board the ship. I was really glad of such an honour.
We had a very good voyage to Brazil. Twenty-two days later, I arrived in the Bay
de Todos los Santos, or All Saints' Bay. So things seemed to change for good.
From that moment I had to decide what to do next. The captain of the ship gave
me twenty ducats for the leopard's skin, and forty ducats for the lion's skin.

The captain introduced me to a good honest man like himself, who had an ingenio,
as they call it (that is a plantation and a sugar house). I lived with him for
some time and acquainted myself with the ways of making sugar. I saw that the
planters lives a good life there and were quite rich. Thus, I made up my mind to
stay in Brazil and to have my own plantation.

The following four years were very successful in business. I managed to learn the
language and make friends with some merchants. I told them about my plans to
sail to Guinea to buy such goods as beads, toys, knives, scissors, elephants'
teeth etc. They listened to me very attentively and one day I gathered a crew
of 17 people and decided to sail to Guinea.

I went on board in an evil hour, on the 1-st of September 1659. That was the same
day that I left my parent's house eight years before. The weather was good, though
it was very hot. But all of a sudden, a violent tornado started. We lost our way.
One of our men died and two were washed overboard. Our ship was leaky.

One morning one of our men cried out, "I can see the land!"
We were really glad to hear that! But we knew nothing. We didn't know where
we were or whether the land was an island or the mainland, whether it was
inhabited or not. Suddenly our ship struck upon sand and the sea broke over it
in a very severe manner! We thought we would all die. At a glance I was in the
water. I thought I was a good swimmer but the storm was so strong, that I almost
sank. Finally, I managed to get to the mainland. Then, I tried to find if there
was someone alive. But except for three hats, one cap, and two shoes, there were
no fellows.

I began to look around to see what kind of place I was in and what to do next.
I was wet, had no clothes and nothing to eat or drink. It was late, so I decided
to find a thick tree like a fir, to sit all night there.

I climbed up the tree and sat in such a manner that in case I fell asleep I might
not fall down. I cut a short stick for my defence and fell fast asleep and slept
comfortably.


