The Stories about Sherlock Holmes

The Crooked Man

 1. Colonel's Death

One summer night I was sitting near the fire and smoking. I was very tired after the busy day. Suddenly there was a bell. I looked at the clock. It was about midnight. Too late for a visitor. I went out into the hall and opened the door.
It was Sherlock Holmes.
"Ah, Watson," said he, "I hoped that you were not in bed."
"My dear friend, please, come in."
"You look surprised, and no wonder! Could you put me up tonight?!"
"With pleasure."
"You told me that you had a guest room. I see that you have no gentleman visitor tonight. Not a hat, not a coat in the hall."
"I'll be happy if you stay."
"Thank you. If you are not going to sleep right now, I'll smoke a pipe with you."
We sat down in the armchairs and smoked in silence. I knew that only a very important business could bring him to me at such an hour. So I waited. Suddenly Holmes said:
"Now, my dear Watson, I'm working at a very interesting case. I'll solve the problem, I am sure. But... Can I ask you for help? Could you go to Aldershot tomorrow?"
"Certainly," I answered.
"Then, if you are not too sleepy, I will give you a sketch of what has happened. And of what we are going to do. Have you read about murder of Colonel Barclay at Aldershot? I am investigating the case."
"I have heard nothing of it."
"The facts are only two days old. James Barclay was a brave and talented commander in India. Many years ago Colonel Barclay married a young and beautiful woman Nancy Devoy. They were a happy family. Nobody heard of any misunderstanding between them. But some people say that Colonel loved his wife more than she loved him. But there was absolutely nothing to prepare people for the tragedy. Usually Colonel Barclay was a kind and pleasant man. Sometimes he became angry and aggressive, sometimes he was sad and silent. But he was never angry with his wife. When depression came on him, he spent all his days at home and never stayed in the dark room.
"Colonel Barclay and his wife lived in a big and nice house. There is a big garden around it. One side of the house is near the road. They had few servants and no children. They didn't often have visitors at their house.
"Mrs. Barclay was Catholic and she was often busy at the church meetings. She helped poor people to get clothes and
food. Last Monday Mrs. Barclay was in a hurry for the meeting. She had a quick dinner and left home. Then she visited Miss Morrison, a young lady who lives in the next house. Then the two ladies went together to their meeting. It lasted forty minutes. At a quarter - past nine Mrs. Barclay returned home.
"Their sitting room faces the road and has a large glass door. The big green lawn is in front of the house. It was into this room that' Mrs. Barclay came first. Then she asked her servant to bring a cup of tea there. When the Colonel heard his wife's voice, he came to the sitting room. The servant was the last person who saw the Colonel alive.
"Ten minutes later the tea was ready and the servant was on
her way to the sitting room. When she came up to the door, she
heard the loud and angry voices of the Colonel and his wife. She
knocked at the door but there was no answer. The servant wanted 
to open the door but it was locked. Naturally she ran down to
tell the cook, and the two women with a man servant came up
into the hall. They could hear two angry voices - of Barclay and
of his wife. Barclay's words were quick and quiet. The lady's words
were clear and loud. ' You coward!' she said again and again. ' What
can be done now? What can be done now? Give me back my
life.' Then there was a sudden dreadful man's cry, a crash, and a
woman's scream. The man servant understood that some tragedy had happened. The door was locked and he decided to get into the sitting room from outside through the glass door.
"It was open. The servant ran inside and saw the lady lying on the sofa. Her eyes were closed but she was alive. On the floor, with his legs on the armchair, in the pool of blood, there lay the Colonel. He was dead.
"The servant couldn't do anything for his master, so he tried to open the room door. But he couldn't find the key. So
he went out again through the glass window and called a policeman and a doctor.
"The doctor asked the servants to carry the lady in the bedroom. She was still unconscious. Then they put the Colonel's body on the sofa and examined it carefully.
"At the back of the Colonel's head there was a long cut. On the floor, near the body, was lying a club of hard wood with a bone handle². The Colonel had a big collection of weapons. He brought them from different countries. But that club was not from his collection. The police found nothing interesting in the room. They also didn't find the key it was gone.
"These are the facts I got on the Tuesday morning when I came to Aldershot."

 2. Crooked Man and Strange Animal

"You can see, dear Watson, that the case is rather interesting, but when I learned the details I realized that it was extraordinary³!
"First I questioned to the servants, but they told me nothing new. Only one servant - Jane Stewart remembered an interesting detail. She heard that the lady said the name ' David ' twice. The colonel ' s name, you remember, was James.
"There was one more thing in the case. The servants and the police were shocked by the colonel ' s face. It had the most dreadful expression of fear and horror! The police had a theory that the Colonel wife had killed him.
"But the poor woman couldn't explain anything. She was absolutely ill and nearly out of reason.
"From the police I learned that Miss Morrison said that she had no idea why Mrs. Barclay got angry with the Colonel.
"I had to smoke some pipes before I could put all the facts in order. The missing door key! That was the most important point. It didn't disappear, somebody had taken it. It means there was a third person in the room. And that third person came in through the window. You know my methods, Watson. I examined the traces on the lawn. Now I know there was a man in the room. I found his foot marks: one on the road, two on the lawn, and two near the window. But it was not the man who surprised me. It was his companion."
"His companion!" I cried.
Holmes took some cloth out of his pocket.
"What do you make of that?" he asked.
The paper was covered with foot marks of some small animal. It had long nails on its feet.
"It's a dog," said I.
"Did you ever hear of a dog running up a curtain? I found its marks on the curtains."
"A monkey, then?"
"But it is not the print of a monkey."
"What can it be, then?"
"Neither dog nor cat nor monkey nor any creature that people keep as a pet. I think the creature is about two feet long². May be it has a tail. The animal has a long body and very short legs. What a pity I haven't found any of his hair! And it is a meat eater."
"Why do you think so?"
"Because it ran up the curtain. A bird's cage was in the window, and it wanted to get the bird."
"Then what was the beast?"
"Ah, that's the problem."
"But why is it so important to you, Holmes?"
"I don't know the answer but I am sure of it. We have learnt a lot. We know that a man stood in the road. He was looking at the quarrel between the Barclays. We know, also, that he ran across the lawn, got into the room, had a strange animal with him. Then... Did he strike the colonel with his club? Did the Colonel fall down when he saw the stranger? I don't know yet. Finally we have the fact that the man carried away the key."
"I think your discoveries made the case more difficult, than it was before," said I.
"You are right. But it means that the case is much more difficult than I thought first. But really, Watson, it is too late. I'll tell you my ideas on our way to Aldershot tomorrow."
"Thank you, my dear friend. But you have stopped at the most interesting place. Can you tell me some more now?"
"Well, I am sure that when Mrs. Barclay left the house at half past seven, she wasn't angry with her husband at all. The servants say that she was never angry and always spoke with her husband in a friendly way. But when she returned home, she went to the sitting room. It means she didn't want to see her husband. She asked for tea. It means she was unhappy. When the Colonel came into the sitting room, the scandal began. I can see that something happened between seven thirty and nine o'clock. She turned into a different woman angry and aggressive.
"But Miss Morrison was with the lady all the evening. She knew something but didn't want to tell. So I decided to talk to Miss Morrison. I was sure she knew something and explained to the young woman that Mrs. Barclay was in great danger. She is ill and even can't help herself.
' I promised my friend that I would say nothing, and a promise is a promise,' said she; ' but if I can really help her... I will tell you what happened on Monday evening.
' I thought you had been dead this thirty years, Henry,' she said in a shaking voice.
' So I have,' said he. He had a very dark face like in a bad dream. His hair were grey, and he looked like a very old man.
' Can you walk on a little way, dear?" said Mrs. Barclay to me; ' I want to have a word with this man. There is nothing to be afraid of. She tried to speak quietly, but she was still white and trembling.
' I did as she asked me, and they talked together for a few minutes. She didn't say a word on our way home. At my door she took me by the hand and asked me not to tell what had happened.'
' I have known him for a long time. He has been so unlucky!' said she. I promised her I would say nothing. She kissed me, and I have never seen her since.'
"As you see, Watson, it was like a light on a dark night. I had to find the man. But was he still in Aldershot? I spent a day and by evening this very evening, Watson, I found him. His name is Henry Wood. He has only been five days in the town. The man is a travelling magician. In the evening he performs in the cafes and restaurants. He carries some strange creature in his box. He uses it in some of his tricks. Sometimes he speaks in a strange language and for the last two nights he had 
been heard crying in his bedroom. The maid said he paid a strange coin for the room. It was an Indian rupee, Watson.
"So now, my dear friend, you know everything. You can see that after the ladies went home, this man followed them. He saw the quarrel between husband and wife through the window. Then he ran into the room and that creature escaped from the box. That is all very certain. But he is the only person in this world who can tell us exactly what happened in that room."
"And are you going to ask him?"
"Yes, and I need a witness."
"But how do you know he'll be there?"
"I told one of my Baker Street boys to watch him. We shall find him in Hudson Street tomorrow, Watson. Now, let's go to sleep!"

 3. Providence

We came to the town in the afternoon and at once went to Hudson Street.
"This is the street," said he at last. A boy ran up to us and said, "He's in, Mr. Holmes."
"Come along, Watson. This is the house."
In a moment we were face to face with the man. It was a warm day but he was sitting near the burning fire. The man's back was deformed and crooked. His face was worn and dark, but it was clear that it was of great beauty long time ago. He pointed at two chairs.
"Mr. Henry Wood, late of India, I believe," said Holmes.
"I want to ask you some questions about Colonel Barclay's death."
"What should I know about that?"
"That's what I want to find out. I think you know that Mrs. Barclay will be tried for murder²."
"I don't know who you are," the man cried, "nor how you know about me, but will you tell me if it is true?"
"Why, the police are waiting for her to come to her senses³. Then they will arrest her."
"She didn't kill him."
"Then you did."
"No, I did not."
"Who killed Colonel James Barclay, then?"
"Nobody. It was the just Providence that killed him. You want me to tell the story? Well, you see me now with my back like a camel. But there was a time when Corporal Henry Wood was handsome. That time we were in India. Barclay was sergeant in the same company. The most beautiful girl was Nancy Devoy. There were two men that loved her. She loved the one who is sitting in front of you. Well, I had her heart. But her father wanted her to marry Barclay. He was rich and well - educated. One day we got into a great trouble. It was a trap. In a week we ran out of water. We couldn't fight any more and the only chance was to get out of siege and ask for help. I had to do my best. I talked it over with Sergeant Barclay, because he knew the country very well. He drew a map for me to follow. At ten o'clock I started on my journey. In ten minutes I walked into our enemies. They were waiting for me. I became their prisoner. From their words I understood that my friend had betrayed me '. I tried to get away, but they caught me. They tortured me again and again. My back and all my bones were broken. I could hardly learn to walk. Finally I got my chance and escaped. I went north and found myself in Afghanistan. There I travelled and learnt the art of travelling magicians. I didn't want to return to England. My friends and my family thought I was dead.
"But when you get old, you start thinking about home. I remembered the bright green fields of England and decided to see them. I saved some money, and then I came here. I know what soldiers like and can make enough money for living."
"Your story is most interesting," said Sherlock Holmes. "I have already heard of your meeting with Mrs. Barclay. Then you followed her home and saw the quarrel through the window. She told him everything she knew. You ran across the lawn and ran into the room."
"I did, sir, and when he saw me, his face turned into the mask of horror and he fell down. But he was dead before he fell. I read death on his face."
"And then?"
"Then Nancy fell unconscious, and I took the door key from her hand. I wanted to unlock it and get help. But then I decided to get away. I didn't want my secret to come out. In a hurry I put the door key in my pocket and lost my stick. Teddy ran up the curtain and I got him down. When I got him into his box, I was off as fast as I could run."
"Who's Teddy?" asked Holmes. The man opened the box and we saw a beautiful reddish - brown creature, thin and quick, with a long, thin nose, and a pair of the finest red eyes that ever I saw in an animal ' s head.
"It's a mongoose," I cried.
"Well, some call them that," said the man. "Snake catcher is what I call them, and Teddy is quick on cobras. I have one, and Teddy catches it every night on the performance."
"Well, can we come to you again if Mrs. Barclay is in serious trouble?"
"In that case, of course."
We left him. When we were walking along the street a policeman came up to us.
"Ah, Holmes," he said, "I think you have heard about the case. It has come to nothing!" "What then?" "The doctors say he died of heart attack. You see it was a very simple case after all." "Oh, yes," said Holmes, smiling. "Come, Watson, I don't think we can return to London." "There's one thing," said I as we walked down to the station. "The husband ' s name was James, and the other was Henry, why did she say ' David '?" "She told about David from the Bible!!"

