Daniel Defoe
Robbinson Crusoe

Chapter 1
Start in Life

My name is Robinson Crusoe. I was born in 1632 in the city of York in a good
family. My father was a merchant from Bremen. My mother was from York. I had two
elder brothers, but I don't know much about them. The first was a lieutenant;
he was killed in the battle. What became of my second brother I never knew.

As I was the youngest child in the family. I didn't want to do anything. I liked
to think about the sea, to watch big and beautiful ships and to dream of my own
voyage. My father, a wise and earnest man, wanted me to become a lawyer or
a merchant; but I could think only about going to sea.

He tried to explain me that it was not a good idea to leave the father's house
and native country, where life was calm, easy and pleasant. My father said that
one day I would take charge of his business. He said,
"My son, if you want to have a good live, you have to learn to do something.
You must work hard. I will help and support you. But we, your parents, will
never give a permission to go to see. Only those men sail abroad who do
nothing and just search for adventures. If you disobey us, you will never be
happy."

While he was talking, I observed the tears run down his face. That affected me
much, so I decided to forget about my dreams and to do as he wished.

Time passed but my desire to see the world grew stronger with each day. I couldn't
do any work, I thought about sailing away. I couldn't ask my father for the
permission to go to sea. So, I decided to talk to my mother. I said,
"Dear mum, I promise to work hard, even harder than now, but please, allow me
to go on one voyage abroad; if I don't like it, I will go no more."

But the conversation had no success. With tears in her eyes, she just repeated
father's words. She replied,
"My dear boy, you will be happy if you stay at home; but if you go abroad, you
will find difficult and unfair life there."
I didn't say a word then, but I could not help thinking about a sea trip.

At the age of 18, I was still at home, doing the work I didn't like. Only the
thoughts of sea could improve my mood. Almost a year after, I met my friend in
the harbour where I used to walk. His father had a ship which sailing to London.
So, he suggested going with them.

I said nothing to my parents and on the 1-st of September 1651, I went on board
a ship to London. How glad I was! My dream came true!

Suddenly the wind began to blow and the sea went very high in the most frightful
manner. My father's tears and my mother's words came fresh into my mind. How
could I leave my father's house and abandon my duty?! I felt dizzy. I was seasick.
When the storm was over, I told my friend that I was very frightened. He laughed
at me saying that it hadn't been a strong storm.

We enjoyed sunny weather and clear blue sky for several days. But he happiness
didn't last long. Another, stronger and more frightful storm arose. Everyone on
board thought that the ship would sink. I was dreadfully frightened. The ship
sprung a leak and water poured into it. We got on a small boat, reached the shore
and saw the ship sink. I wanted to go back home, to have a safe and peaceful life.

Later on, I struggled a lot with myself. "How should I live? Should I go back home
or should I go to sea?" For some time, I didn't know what to do until I finally
laid aside the thoughts of returning home and looked out for a new voyage.


Chapter 2.
Slavery and Escape

I went on board a vessel bound to the coast of Africa, or in other words it was
called a voyage to Guinea. This time I neither had any business in the ship nor
learned to do anything. In all my adventures, this was only voyage which was
successful.

First of all, I got acquainted with the captain of the ship. I told him that I
had a great desire to see the world. The captain liked my idea and suggested 
going on the voyage with him without paying for it. That was a great suggestion!

Soon, the captain and I became good friends. Thanks to that friendship I learned
mathematics, the rules of navigation, and understood some things that were needed
for a sailor. The captain took delight in instructing me and I took delight in
learning. In a word, this voyage made me both a sailor and a merchant, and I
earned a good sum of money.

Yet, even in this voyage I had my misfortunes too. I was continually sick
because of terrible heat. And the other bad thing happened to may friend.
He died soon after his arrival.

Nevertheless, I decided to go the same voyage in the same vessel again. I got
the command of the ship. But unfortunately, that was the unhappiest voyage
that man had ever made. On the way to the Canary Islands, not far from 
African shore, our ship was chased by a Turkish rover of Sallee.
After a few hours the pirates caught up with us. We tried to fight and
defend ourselves. But the strengths were uneven. Three of our men were killed
and eight wounded. We all were taken prisoners into Sallee, a port belonging
to the Moors.

I was kept by the captain as his personal prize. I was young and active, and
I was fit for his business. So, from a successful merchant I turned into
a miserable slave.

My new patron, or master, took me to his house. I took care of his garden and
did all household duties. Later on, he asked me to take care of his ship too.
So, I hoped that some day I could go to sea and become free.

Two years passed without any changes. I took care of the house and performed all
my duties. Sometimes I also went fishing with the master.

Thought one day, my patron asked me to go fishing and catch some fish for dinner.
He himself stayed at home, thus a small ship was at my command. There were two
other men on board with me. But I prepared myself not for fishing, but for
a voyage.

After we had fished for some time and caught nothing I said to the Moor,
"This will not do; we must sail further off."
He, thinking no harm, agreed. Suddenly, I tossed him overboard into the sea. Then,
I turned to the boy, whom they called Xury, and said to him, "Xury, if you are
faithful to me, I'll make you a great man - you will go all over the world with
me." And the boy agreed.

We sailed for five days. Nobody was chasing us but I didn't know where we were.
I had no instruments for taking an observation to see what latitude we were in.
But the best of my calculation, we were somewhere near Morocco. Once or twice in
the daytime I thought I saw the Pico of Tenerife. These lands were full of tigers,
lions, leopards, and other furious creatures, so no humans lived there.

Suddenly, when it was quite dark, we heard dreadful noises of barking, roaring,
and howling wild creatures. Xury was dreadfully frightened, and so was I.
But when the morning came, we had to go on shore and find some fresh water.

We found the fresh water without any difficulties. But on our way back to the
ship Xury saw a dreadful monster. It was sleeping. I looked where he pointed to
and saw a great lion lying in the shade of a tree. I took our biggest gun and shot
him in the head.

The lion was good for nothing to us, except for his skin which served me to lie
upon.

Chapter 3.
Wrecked on a Desert Island

Xury and I decided to explore the island. I saw that the island was inhabited and,
finally, after ten days, we saw some people. They were quite black and naked.
I decided to have a talk with them but the people were really frightened of me
and didn't understand what I was trying to say. Therefore, as much as I could,
I tried to explain everything with signs. So, I made signs for something to eat.
Half an hour later, they brought two pieces of meat and some corn. We made signs
of thanks.

Suddenly, when Xury and I were lying by the shore, two mighty creatures appeared.
We saw that the people were terribly frightened, especially the women.

I loaded my gun, and asked Xury to load the others. As soon as the creature came
close to me, I fired and shot it directly in the head. It instantly sank down into
the water. The other one ran away.

The people were really shocked. But when they saw the creature dead and sunk in
the water, they took heart and dragged it on shore. We saw that it was a leopard,
spotted and fine. The negroes wished to eat the flesh of this creature, so I
presented it to them.

One beautiful morning I heard Xury cried out, 
"Master, master, a ship!"
That was a Portuguese ship. Three hours later, we managed to get close to it.
The sailors on board the ship tried to speak to me in Portuguese, and in Spanish,
and in French, but I didn't understand them. However, there was a Scottish sailor
who asked me who and what I was in English. I told him that I was and Englishman
and that I had escaped from slavery at Sallee.

So, they invited me to go on board the ship. I was really glad of such an honour.
We had a very good voyage to Brazil. Twenty-two days later, I arrived in the Bay
de Todos los Santos, or All Saints' Bay. So things seemed to change for good.
From that moment I had to decide what to do next. The captain of the ship gave
me twenty ducats for the leopard's skin, and forty ducats for the lion's skin.

The captain introduced me to a good honest man like himself, who had an ingenio,
as they call it (that is a plantation and a sugar house). I lived with him for
some time and acquainted myself with the ways of making sugar. I saw that the
planters lives a good life there and were quite rich. Thus, I made up my mind to
stay in Brazil and to have my own plantation.

The following four years were very successful in business. I managed to learn the
language and make friends with some merchants. I told them about my plans to
sail to Guinea to buy such goods as beads, toys, knives, scissors, elephants'
teeth etc. They listened to me very attentively and one day I gathered a crew
of 17 people and decided to sail to Guinea.

I went on board in an evil hour, on the 1-st of September 1659. That was the same
day that I left my parent's house eight years before. The weather was good, though
it was very hot. But all of a sudden, a violent tornado started. We lost our way.
One of our men died and two were washed overboard. Our ship was leaky.

One morning one of our men cried out, "I can see the land!"
We were really glad to hear that! But we knew nothing. We didn't know where
we were or whether the land was an island or the mainland, whether it was
inhabited or not. Suddenly our ship struck upon sand and the sea broke over it
in a very severe manner! We thought we would all die. At a glance I was in the
water. I thought I was a good swimmer but the storm was so strong, that I almost
sank. Finally, I managed to get to the mainland. Then, I tried to find if there
was someone alive. But except for three hats, one cap, and two shoes, there were
no fellows.

I began to look around to see what kind of place I was in and what to do next.
I was wet, had no clothes and nothing to eat or drink. It was late, so I decided
to find a thick tree like a fir, to sit all night there.

I climbed up the tree and sat in such a manner that in case I fell asleep I might
not fall down. I cut a short stick for my defence and fell fast asleep and slept
comfortably.

Chapter 4.
First Weeks On the Island

It was a good day on the island. The weather was clear and the storm abated.
I was exhausted and hungry, so I decided to look for some food. I walked around
and saw the ship, which wasn't broken to pieces by the storm, as I had supposed.
I thought that there might be some necessary things for my use, so I had to get
there somehow.

The sea was very calm, so I swam near a quarter of a mile to the ship and with
the help of a rope I climbed aboard. At first, I found that all the ship's
provisions were dry and untouched by the water. So, I filled my pockets with
biscuits and bags with bread, rice, Dutch cheeses and five pieces of dried
goat's flesh. Then I made something like a raft from two or three large spars of
wood, tying each with a rope and nailing some boards upon it, to carry my stuff.
I also took a box of tools, some guns, and two barrels of powder. I got to the
shore without any serious problems.

Next, I had to view the place I was in. There was a high hill not far from me.
I took some guns with me and travelled to discover the top of that hill, from
which I saw that I was on an island. Fortunately, I didn't see any wild animals.

The day was almost over but I knew neither what to do nor where to have a rest.
I was afraid to lie down on the ground, so I made up my mind to make a kind of
hut for that night's sleep.

I also needed a place to hide all my goods. So I made a little tent and brought
everything that could be spoiled either by rain or sun into that tent.

From that day on I used to go on board the ship looking for something useful
and bringing it home.

I had been then for thirteen days shore, and I had been eleven times on boards,
so I brought away one pair of large scissors, a dozen of good knives and forks,
about thirty-six pounds value in money - some European coins, some Brazilian,
some pockets of gold and silver. I was really glad to have all those things.

Once, on my way back to land, a strong wind arose. I had hardly reached the shore
because the wind became so strong that the waves covered the ship. My tent was
upon a low wet ground near the sea, which wasn't quite safe. So I decided to find
a better place for my living. I had many thoughts of the way how to do that and
what kind of dwelling to make - whether I should make a cave in the earth, or
a tent upon the earth. On one side of the rock, there was a place looking like
an entrance to a cave.

It was possible to get into the cave be a short ladder, which I lifted when I
was inside. I built a fence, do I felt completely safe, as I thought, from all
the world, and consequently I slept secure at night. Neither man nor animal
could get through that fence. I also made a large tend, which should protect my riches, all my provisions and ammunition to my new home.

I worked very hard to make my new home beautiful, comfortable and safe. It took me more than three months to do it.

While I was working in a cave, a terrible storm came up from a thick, dark cloud and suddenly there was a flash of lighting, and after that a great clap of thunder. I thought, "Oh, my powder!" My heart sank when I thought that all my powder might be destroyed! Without it I wouldn't be able to protect myself and to get any food.

When the storm was over, I started making bags and boxes to separate the powder, hoping that they might not all fire at once. So I placed it in my new cave, which I called my kitchen.

On the days free of making my dwelling place, I walked around searching for some food. I discovered that there were goats in the island. I was so glad of it! But it was the most difficult thing in the world to catch them as they were very swift. One day I watched them, thinking that I could shoot one, but then they saw me they ran away at the same moment. Once, they were in a valley, so they couldn't see me. That was a good chance to fire at them. I shot an old goat. But I didn't notice a small goat by her side. It grieved for its dead mother. I picked up the old goat and carried it home over my shoulder. But the kid was following me all the way. I thought I would domesticate it, but it didn't eat anything, so I had to kill it too. That was better option than to keep it starving to death.

After I had been on the island for about ten or twelve days, I realized that I had to make a kind of a calendar to follow the time. To prevent this, I cut with my knife upon a large post - "I came on shore here on the 30-th september 1659." Then, every day I cut a notch. Every seventh notch was longer than the others. And every first day of the month had the longest notch. Thus I kept my calendar, weekly, monthly, and yearly reckoning of time.

And I had to remember one more thing: on board the ship, we had a dog and two cats. I brought them home. As I also found pens, ink and paper on board the ship, I decided to write down my thoughts. It was a hard time on the island: I was alone, no family, no friends, and no business. I remembered my father's words that I could stay at home and live calm and peaceful life. But on the other hand, I had to be thankful for being alive. So, after some time of thinking the following thoughts were written on a sheet of paper: Evil - 1) I am thrown on a horrible island, with no hope to be saved; 2) I am alone and feel miserable; 3) I have no clothes; 4) I am without any defence, I have nothing to protest myself from wild animals; 5) I have no one to speak to; Good - 1) But I am alive; 2) But I am not starving; 3) But I am in hot climate, where there is no need of it; 4) But I am on an island where I see no wild beasts; 5) But God sent the ship near enough to the shore, that I could get many necessary things. And I have a dog and cats for my company.

This sheet of paper made me think no matter how hard my life seemed, there always was something positive to be thankful for.

So, I left my pessimistic thoughts and continued working. I needed many things in the house. Thus, I made a table and chair, and some large shelves out of the planks of the ship. It was a great pleasure for me to see all my goods in such an order!

From that moment I began to keep a journal of every day's employment.

Chapter 5.
Illness

May 4. - I went fishing, but caught no fish that was good to eat. I dried some of the fish in the sun, and ate them dry. All May I was working hard to make my dwelling comfortable.

June 16-17. - I found a large turtle at the seaside. That was the first time I saw that creature. I spent the whole day cooking the turtle. Its flesh was very delicious.

June 18. - It was raining all day long and it was a bit chilly. It was unusual in that latitude.

June 19. - Maybe because of bad weather and rains I fell ill. I was shivering and had a terrible headache.

June 21. - I was ill, frightened almost to death with my sickness, and that there was no one to help me. I prayed to God for the first time since the storm.

June 26. - I felt better, but very weak. I had nothing to eat. So I took my gun and went hunting. I killed a goat, but got it home with much difficulty.

June 27. - I stayed in bed all day long. I neither ate nor drank anything. I was ready to die for water, but I had no strength to stand up to drink. I prayed to God again, but all I could say was, "Lord, look upon me! Lord, pity me! Lord, have mercy upon me!" After some time, I fell asleep. I woke up at night and found myself much refreshed, but weak and very thirsty. However, as I had no water at home, so I had to wait till morning. Thus, I went to bed and had a terrible dream: I saw a man in a great black cloud and in a bright flame of fire. When he stepped upon the ground, the earth trembled. He spoke to me in a terrible voice. All that I understood was this:  "You haven't learned anything from your life and you are not regretting the things you did, now you shall die." I was so terrified! I thought that it was a punishment for my sin - my rebellious behaviour against my father. Then I cried out, "Lord, be my help, for I need it." That was the first player, if I may call it so, that I had made for many years.

But let's return to my journal.
June 28. - After I slept for a while, I felt better. The first thing I did after getting up was filling a bottle with water and putting up was my bed. I was very weak, but I made a supper from the turtle's eggs. After I had eaten, I tried to walk, but found myself too weak to carry a gun. So, I sat down upon sand looking at the calm and beautiful sea. I was thinking about my father and mother. They loved me so much, but I had left them for my own pleasure. But nothing good worked out of my ideas and dreams to see the world. I disobeyed my parents, and now I was punished. I believed that nothing happens without God's knowledge, so I played again and apologized for my misbehaviour.

June 30. - I was a good day. I killed a seafowl or two. I ate some more of the turtle's eggs, which were very tasty.

July 4. - In the morning, I found the Bible and began to read The New Testament. I read it every morning and every night. That was the first time in all my life that I prayed and began to hope that God would hear me. Now I said the words, "Call on me, and I will glorify thee!" And each day I thanked God for his kindness to me.

From the 4-th of July my health and strength returned and I felt much better. I got back to my everyday routine.

Chapter 6.
Agricultural Experience

I had now been on that unhappy island for more than ten months and had no hope to get out of it. I believed that no human had ever set foot upon that place. Having then secured my habitation, I had a great desire to make a more perfect exploration of the island.

It was on the 15-th of July when I began my exploration. I found a little brook of running water, very fresh and good. On the banks of that brook I found pleasant meadows with beautiful plants.

The following day I went up further than I had gone the day before. In that part of the island I found different fruits. I found melons upon the ground and grapes on the trees, which were very ripe and rich. That was a surprising discovery, and I was very glad of it. I found an excellent use for the grapes. I dried them in the sun and kept them as raisins are kept.

I surveyed the island with a feeling that I was the king and lord of all that country. I saw a lot of cocoa, orange, lemon and citron trees there. The green limes that I gathered were not only pleasant to eat, but very wholesome. I mixed their juice with water, which was very cool and refreshing. I decided to gather grapes, limes, and lemons to furnish myself for the wet season.

The following day, on the nineteenth, I make two small bags to carry my harvest home. But how surprised I was to see some of the grapes having been eaten! Thus, I concluded there were some wild creatures, which had done that. But what they were I didn't know.

I was pleased with the fruitfulness of that valley, the security from storms and wood. When I came home from the journey, I concluded that I has chosen the worst part of the island for habitation. Hence, I began to think of moving to a place equally safe but in that pleasant, fruitful part of the island.

Finally, I resolved not to move, as that place was near the seaside and then I had no means to protect myself. But in the valley, I build a little kind of a bower and surrounded it at a distance with a strong fence being a double hedge. I had then my country house and my sea coast house. It took me up to the beginning of August to finish that work.

It rained every day till the middle of October. Sometimes it was raining so violently, that I could not stir out my cave for several days.


