The Stories about Sherlock Holmes

The Adventure of the Speckled Band

 * Helen Stoner Tells Her Story

I studied the methods of my friend Sherlock Holmes during the last eight years and I was sure that he did his work for the love of his art - not for the love of money. Many cases were tragic, some were comic, some mysterious, but they were never ordinary. Of all cases this one was the most exciting.
It all began in those early days when I was living at Sherlock Holmes's flat in Baker Street in London.
It was early in April in the year 1883. I woke one morning and saw Sherlock Holmes standing, fully dressed, near my bed. He was a late riser and as the clock showed me that it was only a quarter past seven, I looked at him in some surprise.
"Very sorry to wake you up, Watson," said he.
"What is it ... a fire?"
"No, a client. I think this young lady has arrived too excited. She is waiting now in the sitting room. Now, when young ladies walk around London at this early hour, and knock sleepy people up out of their beds, I think that it is something very important which they have to tell. It is going to be a very interesting case! Would you like to come and listen to what she has got to say."
"My dear friend, I'll be down in a minute."
When I came into the sitting room, I saw a lady dressed in black standing by the window.
"Good-morning, madam," said Holmes. "My name is Sherlock Holmes. This is my true friend Dr. Watson. So, you can speak as freely as before myself I can see that you are very cold. Move close to the fire and I'll ask to bring you a cup of hot coffee."
"I am not cold," said the woman in a low voice.
"What, then?"
"I'm afraid! Afraid to death!" She looked very tired and unhappy, and her face was very white. She had frightened eyes, like those of some hunted animal. She was a young woman of about thirty, but her hair was grey.
"Don't be afraid of anything in my house, just tell us everything you have got," said Sherlock Holmes. "We will help you. You have come by train this morning, I see."
"You know me, then?"
"No, but I noticed the second half of a return ticket in your hand when you took off your glove. You started your way early in the morning."
The lady looked at Holmes surprisingly.
"Whatever your reasons are, you are absolutely right," said she. "I started from home before six. Sir, I shall go mad if I get no help. I have heard of you, Mr. Holmes from Mrs. Farintosh, whom you helped a lot. It was from her that I had your address. Oh, sir, do you not think that you could help me, too? Can you explain some mysteries to me? Now I can't pay you but in a month or six weeks I shall be married, and will have my own money."
Holmes turned to his desk and opened it and looked through some papers.
"Farintosh," said he. "Ah yes, I can remember her case. I think it was before your time, Watson. I can only say, madam, that I shall be happy to do my beat to help you as I did to your friend. As for paying, you can do at the time, which you choose. And now tell us your story."
"Oh dear!" answered our visitor, "the very horror of my situation is that I have no facts to tell you. Nothing that will be of any help to you. I'm afraid you can think that I am just a nervous woman... But I have heard, Mr. Holmes, that you can see deeply into the human heart. You may advise me how to walk among the dangers around me."
"Tell me all you know, madam."
"My name is Helen Stoner, and I am living with my stepfather. He is the last member of one of the oldest Saxon families in England, the Roylotts of Stoke Moran."
"I know the name," said Holmes.
"The family was one of the richest in England but in the last century the family lost all their power. When my stepfather was born they had no money. Now nothing is left, only a small piece of land and an old house. When my stepfather was young he became a doctor, because he had to work. He went to India and worked there successfully. But one day a tragedy happened. Somebody got into his house and stole many things. My stepfather got so angry that beat his servant to death. My stepfather spent many years in prison and returned to England an unhappy and angry man. When Dr. Roylott was in India he married my mother, Mrs. Stoner. Her husband my father was dead at that time. My sister Julia and I were twins, and we were only two years old at the time of my mother's second marriage. After our return to England my mother died and left all her money to Dr. Roylott, our stepfather. He decided no to work any more and took us to live with him in the old country house. My mother ordered that when we got married he should give each of us money each year.
"But a terrible change came over our stepfather about this time. Instead of making friends with our neighbours, he shut himself up in his house and seldom came out. But when he did, he became very angry and violent. At last he became the terror of the village.
"Now he is more and more violent, and sometimes has fights with the people from the village. Everybody is afraid of him now, and they run away when they see him. His only friends are gypsies. My stepfather loves them and they can do whatever they want in our house.
"And he also loves Indian animals. His friend sends them to him from India. Now he has a cheetah and a baboon, which walk freely in our garden.
"You can imagine from what I say that my poor sister Julia and I had very unhappy lives. No servant stayed with us, and for a long time we did all the work in the house. She was thirty at the time of her death, and her hair was already grey, like my hair now."
"Your sister is dead, then?"
"She died two years ago, and that's why I'm here. Two years ago at Christmas time we were staying at our aunt's in London. There Julia met a young man who asked to marry her. My stepfather agreed. But two weeks before the wedding day a tragedy happened."
Sherlock Holmes was listening with his eyes closed but now he opened them and looked at Helen.
"Please tell us everything about her death in detail," said he.
"It is easy for me to do so, because I can remember it all very well. It was a terrible time. But first I'd like to tell you about our house. You can live only in one part of it, because it is very old and not comfortable. Our bedrooms are on the ground floor, the first is Dr. Roylott's bedroom, the second is my sister's, and the third is my bedroom. The rooms all have windows into the garden and their doors open into the corridor. Do you understand me?"
"Yes, madam."
"That terrible night Dr. Roylott went to his room early. Later we went to our bedrooms but suddenly my sister came into my room. She couldn't get to sleep because of the smell of the strong Indian cigars. My stepfather liked to smoke them. At eleven o'clock she left me, but she stopped at the door and looked back.
' Tell me, Helen,' said she, ' have you ever heard a whistle at night?"
' Never,' said I.
' It is strange, but about three in the morning, I hear a low whistle. I am a light sleeper and it always wakes me. I cannot tell where it comes from, perhaps from the next room.'
' Gypsies ?'
She smiled back at me, closed my door, and a few moments later I heard her key turn in the lock."
"Why did you lock your doors at night?" said Holmes.
"Our stepfather kept a cheetah and a baboon. We were afraid of them and of gypsies."
"Please go on."
"I could not sleep that night. It was a wild stormy night. The wind was blowing hard. Suddenly I heard the wild scream of a terrified woman. I knew that it was my sister's voice. I
jumped from my bed, and ran into the corridor. When I opened my door I think I heard a low whistle, and a few moments later the sound of falling metal.
"I ran to my sister's door. By the light of the corridor lamp I saw my sister appear, her face white with terror, her hands asking for help. I ran to her, but at that moment she fell to the ground. She was in terrible pain. She was crying: ' Help me, Helen! I am dying!' and then ' Oh, my God! Helen! It was the band! The speckled band!' She wanted to say something else, but she couldn't, only pointed her finger to the stepfathers room. I called loudly for my stepfather, and he ran out of his room to help her. But we could do nothing. Such was the terrible end of my dear sister."
"One moment," said Holmes, "are you sure about this whistle and metallic sound?"
"I think I heard it, but the night was so stormy... Perhaps I made a mistake."
"Was your sister dressed?"
"No, she was in her night dress. In her right hand there was found a match."
"It means that she tried to look about her. That is important. And what did the police find?"
"They tried but they couldn't understand why my sister had died. Nobody could get into her room and they didn't find any poison in her body."
"What do you think this unfortunate lady died of, then?"
"I think that she died of fear and nervous shock. What frightened her? I cannot imagine."
"Were there gypsies in the house?"
"Yes, they are always there."
"Ah, and what is ' speckled band '?"
-"Perhaps she meant some band of people gypsies. Perhaps she was talking about those bands which gypsies wear round their heads."
Holmes shook his head.
"Please go on your story."
"That was two years ago and I have been very lonely without my sister. A month ago a dear friend asked me to marry me. We are going to get married soon. Two days ago my stepfather asked me to move into my sister's room. He wanted to mend the bedroom wall and I had to sleep in my sister's bed.
"Can you imagine my terror when last night I suddenly heard the same low whistle? I jumped up and lit the lamp, but saw nothing. I was too afraid to go to bed again, so I dressed and ran out of the house and came to London to ask for your help."
"This is a very deep business.'" said my friend. "But we must act as quickly as possible. Can we look at all these rooms if we go to your house today, Miss Stoner? But your stepfather must not know."
"He is meeting some important people in London today, so he is out all day long."
"Excellent. You will come with me, Watson?"
"Thank you, sir."

 * Sherlock Holmes and Dr. Watson Visit the House

"And what do you think of it all, Watson?" asked Sherlock Holmes when Helen Stoner left the room.
"Dark, mysterious and frightening. What about low whistles and strange words of her dying sister?"
"If you think about the whistles at night and a band of gypsies who are friends to her stepfather, you will understand that we have every reason to believe that the doctor doesn't want his stepdaughter's marriage."
"But what, then, did the gypsies do?"
"I don't know. We cannot give answer to many questions, that's why we are going to visit the doctor's house today. What's that noise?"
Our door suddenly opened and a tall man came in.
"Which of you is Holmes?" he asked.
"My name, sir," said my friend.
"I am Dr. Grimesby Roylott of Stoke Moran."
"Will you sit down, Doctor?" said Holmes.
"I know that my stepdaughter has been here. What did she tell you?"
"It is a little cold for the time of the year," said Holmes.
"What did she tell you?" cried the doctor angrily.
"The flowers are starting to grow," said Holmes.
"I know you, Holmes trouble maker! You try to look like a policeman and to work like a policeman, but you are just a trouble maker!"
My friend smiled.
"When you go out close the door, there is a strong wind outdoors."
"I will go when I have finished. It's better for you to leave me alone. Remember I am a dangerous man!"
He left the room quickly.
"We mustn't be late. Now I see that Miss Stoner is in great danger. And now, Watson, we shall have breakfast, and then I try to find out more about this man."
It was nearly one o'clock when Sherlock Holmes came back.
"I have seen the will of his wife," said he. "Our dangerous friend needs the girls' money, because he has only 750 pounds a year from his dead wife. If the girls marry, they will ask for their money and he will have too little of it. And now the doctor knows that we are interested in him. So if you are ready, we are leaving for Stoke Moran. Don't forget to take your gun with you, Watson. And the toothbrush we are going to stay there for the night."
When we got to Stoke Moran, Miss Stoner met us and showed the house. The building was made of grey stone. One part of it was nearly ruined but the other was much better. Helen showed us the three bedrooms.
"Everything is OK with your bedroom, Miss Stoner! It doesn't need any mending, as I can see," said Holmes.
"I think my stepfather wanted me to move into my sister's room. It was his plan," said Helen.
"It sounds possible," said Holmes and looked at the windows carefully. "When you lock the windows, can anybody get inside from the garden?"
"No."
Holmes went into Julia's room and watched it. There was a table, two chairs and a bed there.
"Why is that bell rope there, over the bed?" he asked.
"It goes into the servant's room. They put it here two years ago. But we never had servants here."
Holmes came up to the bell rope and pulled it.
"But it doesn't work! This is very interesting! Look There is an air vent near it! Isn't it strange too? Why have you got an air vent that goes into another room, and not outside, Miss Stoner?"
"Very strange!" said Helen. "The bell rope that doesn't ring, and a ventilator that does not ventilate."
We all went to the doctor's bedroom. There was not much furniture there. But Holmes looked at it very carefully. There was a bed, a round table, a comfortable armchair, and a big metal safe near the wall.
"What's in here?" he asked, touching the safe.
"My stepfather's business papers."
"Oh! you have seen inside, then?"
"Only once, some years ago. I remember that it was full of papers."
"There isn't a cat in it, for example?"
"No. What a strange idea!"
"Well, look at this!" He pointed at a small plate of milk on the top of the safe.
"No; we don't keep a cat. But there is a cheetah and a baboon but they don't drink from such small plates."
"Now, Miss Stoner," said Holmes. "I see that your life is in danger. It is very important and you must follow my advice. Tonight my friend Watson and I spend the night in your room."
Both Miss Stoner and I looked at him in surprise.
"Yes, we must. Let me explain. We will take a room in the village hotel. When your stepfather goes to bed, turn on the lamp in your sister's room as a signal to us. Then go to your bedroom and don't forget to leave the windows open. We'll get into your sisters' room and wait for the sound of falling metal and the whistle. I think we won't wait for a long time."
"Oh, Mr. Holmes, now I see that you know how my sister died. Tell me how it happened. Do you know?"
"I must get some more information but I think that I know.
Now be brave and good-bye. Remember, if you do what I tell you, Miss Stoner, you will be out of danger for ever."
Holmes and I went to the village and took a room in a small hotel. From our window we could see the house well. Holmes said to me:
"It is going to be dangerous there, Watson. Doctor is an angry and clever man."
"My dear friend, if I can be of help, I will come with you."
"Thank you, Watson. I'll really need your help. Did you see the bell rope and air vent in the room? It means there is a hole between two bedrooms. I knew about it from the very beginning. Do you remember Helen told us about the smell of Dr. Roylott's cigarettes?"
"There is an air vent between the bedrooms, there is a bell rope that doesn't work and there is a lady who is in danger. I still cannot see..."
"What is more, the lady's bed is fixed to the floor. It stays there, near the bell rope and under the air vent."
"Holmes!" I cried. "I begin to understand! We must stop him!"

 * Terrible Death

All was dark at the house. We were watching the windows and then suddenly we saw bright light.
"That is our signal," said Holmes. "It comes from the right window."
We left the hotel and went to the house. We walked quietly through the garden, and climbed into the bedroom through the open window.
When we were in Julia's bedroom, we closed the window and looked around the room. It looked just the same as before. Holmes said in a low voice, "We must make no noise." I showed him that I had heard. "We must sit without a light. He could see it through the air vent."
I took out my pistol and put it on the corner of the table.
Holmes brought a long thin stick with him and put it near him with a box of matches. Then he turned off the light and we were left in darkness².
How shall I ever forget those terrible hours?
I could not hear anything but I knew Holmes sat near, with open eyes, listening and watching.
From outside we heard the cry of a night bird, and far away the church clock striking every quarter of an hour. Twelve o'clock - one two and three, and still we sat waiting silently.
Suddenly there was a light showing through the air vent. There was a sound of movement, and then another very small sound. Holmes jumped up from the bed, struck a match, and beat wildly with his stick.
"You see it, Watson?" he called. "You see it?"
I saw nothing. I heard a low whistle. But I could see that Holmes's face was white with terror.
I came up to the lamp and turned it on. Holmes looked at the air vent. Suddenly there was the most terrible cry I have ever heard.
Then the house was silent again.
"What does it mean?" I asked.
"It means that it is all over," Holmes answered. "Take your pistol. We must go into Dr Roylott's room."
We took the lamp and came into the doctor's room. There was a lamp on the table. The iron safe was open. The doctor sat on a chair. His head was up and his eyes were fixed on the air vent. Round his head there was a yellow band with brown spots. He did not move as we came in the room. He was dead.
"The band! The speckled band!" said Holmes in a low voice. I took a step forward. At once the band moved, and I saw it was a snake.
The snake moved and began to turn its head.
"It's a very dangerous Indian snake. Its poison can kill anybody. Roylott died quickly. We must put the snake back in the safe." Very, very carefully, Holmes took the snake and threw it into the metal safe and quickly closed it.
These are the true facts of the death of Dr. Grimesby Roylott.
We went to Miss Stoner and told her everything. There was no danger for her but the next day she left for her aunt who
lived in Harrow. We called the police and they decided that the doctor met his death playing with his dangerous pet.
On our way back to London, I asked Holmes how he learned about the snake.
"At first, Watson, I thought that it was gypsies. But the danger couldn't get into the room through the window or the
door. So I understood that the danger was in the ventilator and the bell rope something came through the ventilator and down the rope. When I saw the milk I understood that it was a snake. It was easy for the doctor to get Indian animals. Of course, he knew that it was very difficult to find this snake's poison in the dead body. This clever and cruel man used his Indian knowledge to kill. He taught the snake to obey the whistle and return to its master. It was easy to put it through the ventilator. It climbed down the rope on the bed, and it bit the person there as soon as he or she moved. He kept the snake in the metal safe. The sound of falling metal was the door of the safe. Perhaps the snake came through the air vent many times before it killed Julia. Helen, too, nearly dies because of this snake. But tonight when I beat the snake with his stick, it got afraid and went back through the air vent. So I think I killed the doctor, but I can't say that I am sorry about it!" said Holmes.


The Five Orange Pips

 * Uncle Elia's Story

It is not easy to choose one of Sherlock Holmes's cases to tell you because they all are interesting or strange or mysterious. There is one of his last cases, which was so interesting in its details and surprising in its results that I'm going to tell you the story now.
It was the end of September 1887. My wife was visiting her aunt, so I was staying with my friend Sherlock Holmes in Baker Street. The weather was terrible that day. All the day the wind was blowing hard and it was raining heavily outside. Sherlock Holmes and Dr. Watson were spending a quiet evening together.
"Was that the door bell?" I asked. "Who can this be? Some friend of yours, perhaps?"
"No, I'm sure. If he comes on business in this weather, it's very important. Come in!" said Holmes.
A good-looking young man came in. He was wet, tired and worried.
"You have come far?" asked Holmes.
"Yes, from Horsham. I have come for advice."
"You get it easily."
"And help."
"Ah - that is not always so easy."
"I have heard of you, Mr. Holmes, and a friend has sent me to you. He says that you know everything..."
"He said too much. Well, sit down and tell me, if you can, all I need to know."
The young man sat down, and put his wet feet near the fire.
"My name is John Openshaw. I think it is better to begin my story from some facts of my family. My father, Joseph, had a brother, Elias, who went to live in America when he was young. He became a planter in Florida and at the time of war he fought in Jackson's army. He didn't like the black Americans, but during the Civil War he fought against the men from the North, and with those from the South. When the war was over he returned to his plantation for three or four years. But the South lost the war, and there was equality for black people. About 1869 or 1870 he came back to England with a lot of money and bought a comfortable house near Horsham.
"He had no family and was a strange, unhappy man. He didn't want any friends and he often drank a lot. But he was kind to me and when I was twelve, I came to live with him. When I was sixteen, I was quite a master of the house. I kept all the keys and could go where I liked and do what I liked.
But there was one room in the house which was always locked. Nobody could go there. Sometimes I looked through the keyhole and could see nothing but old boxes.
"One day Uncle Elias got a letter from the town of Pondicherry in India. 'Pondicherry stamp! What can this be? I have no friends there,' he said and opened the letter. Out there jumped five little dried orange pips. They fell on his plate. I began to laugh at this and stopped suddenly because I saw my uncle's white face. ' K.K.K.!' he cried. ' Oh my God, my God, they have found me!' ' What is it, uncle?' I cried. ' Death,' he said and ran upstairs.
"I looked at the envelope. It had three Ks on its back. There was no letter inside. Who sent it? And why was my uncle so frightened?
"I left the breakfast table. When I was going upstairs, I met my uncle coming down. He had a large key in one hand, and a small black box in the other.
' They may do what they like, but I will win in the end,' he said angrily. ' Tell Mary ' she was his servant ' that I want her to light a fire in my room today, and send for Fordham, my lawyer.'
"When Fordham arrived, they both went up to uncle's bedroom. They spent there a lot of time and at last asked me to come in. The fire was burning brightly, and all around it there was black burnt paper. The small box with three Ks on it was open and there was nothing inside.
' John,' my uncle said, ' I know that I'm going to die soon. My brother, your father, will have all my money and my house after my death, and you will have it when he dies. I hope you can enjoy it. If you find you cannot, take my advice and leave everything to your worst enemy. I don't know what is going to happen... I'm afraid that my money brings death with it.'
"I couldn't understand what he meant, but I felt the danger, Surprisingly, nothing dangerous happened for a few weeks. Nothing happened to change our lives and we lived our usual quiet life. But I saw a change in my uncle. He started to drink a lot and every day he shut himself away in his room, he didn't want to see anyone. One day he drank too much and ran wildly out of the house. He was running about the garden with a gun in his hand, shouting out that he was afraid of no man. Then, suddenly frightened, he ran back into the house, and into his room, locking himself in again.
"One night I heard a cry. I got up out of my bed and ran to my uncle's room. The door was open, the room was empty.
"In the morning we found him at the far end of the garden, face downwards ', in a very small lake. He was dead. The police said he killed himself but I knew he was afraid to die, so I didn't think it was true."
Holmes stopped the young man for a minute.
"One moment," he said. "When did your uncle get a letter from India and when did he die?"
"The letter arrived on March 10, 1883. He died seven weeks later, upon the night of May 2nd."
"Thank you. Please, go on."
"After my uncle's death, my father moved into the house. Of course I asked him to look carefully at the locked room but we didn't find anything important. All we found was the small box. It was empty, and had a piece of paper with three Ks and the words ' Letters and Receipts ' written on it."

 * Five More Pips

"So we lived in the uncle's house. On the fourth day after the New Year I heard my father's cry of surprise when we were sitting at the breakfast table. I looked at him and saw five orange pips in his hand and an open letter.
"He always laughed at my story of Elias and the five orange pips, but now he looked puzzled and even frightened.
' What does it mean, John?' he said in a low voice. His face was white.
' Look! There's K. K. K. on the letter,' he said. We were afraid.
' So the letter says. Here are the letters K. K. K. It also tells me to leave the papers in the garden. What papers?"
' The papers in the Uncle Elias's box. But he burnt them!'
' Well, where does the letter come from? From Dundee in Scotland,' he said. ' Why do they write to me about papers?' said my father.
' You must tell the police.'
' No, they will laugh at me. Let's forget about it.'
"Three days later my father went to see his friend who lived some miles away. I thought he would be safer away from home. But I was wrong.
"On the second day I got a letter from his friend asking me to come at once. The police said that my father was walking home in the dark when he fell down a hill. He was badly hurt and died soon after. They decided it was an accident, but I didn't agree.
"But I was sure it was not. I thought it was a murder, and I couldn't forget the five orange pips and the strange letters to my uncle and my father.
"Now I was the one to own the house. I have lived alone in that house for nearly three years now. Then yesterday I got this."
"The young man showed us the letter with K.K.K. on it and five small orange pips inside.
"You see? It comes from London, and it says ' Leave the papers in the garden.' Those are the words that were in the letter to my father."
"What did you do next?" asked Holmes.
"Nothing," answered John. "I don't know what to do. I am too afraid."
"Nothing?" cried Holmes. "Young man, you are in greatest danger!"
"I have talked to the police," said Openshaw sadly. "But they laughed at me. They say there is nothing to worry about."
"How stupid they are!" cried Holmes. "Why did you come to me and why did you not come at once? Haven't you found anything which can help us?"
"Well, I found this paper in the locked room," said John and gave us a small piece of half burnt paper. It said:
4th. Hudson came. Same old platform.
7th. Set the pips on McCauley, Paramore, and John Swain, of St. Augustine.
9th. McCauley cleared.
10th. John Swain cleared.
12th. Visited Paramore. All well.
"Thank you," said Holmes as he gave the paper back to John. "And now, we haven't got time even to talk. You must go home at once and act."
"What shall I do?"
"There is only one thing to do. You must put this piece of paper that you've shown us into the box. You must also put in a note to say that your uncle burned all the other papers. Then leave the box in the garden. Do you understand?"
"Yes, yes."
"We must first get you out of danger."
"Thank you," said John. "I shall do as you say. I shall see you at Horsham, then?" said John.
"No. Your secret hides in London. It is there that I shall look for it."
"Then I shall call on you in a day, or in two days, with news of the box and papers." And with those words, John went out into the dark night, the wind and the rain.

 * Some More Deaths

Sherlock Holmes sat for some time in silence and watched the fire. Then he smoke his pipe and watched the blue smoke rings as they came up to the ceiling.
"I think, Watson," he said at last, "that of all our cases, this is the most fantastic."
"Well, yes, John Openshaw is walking among great dangers, and we cannot say what these dangers are. Who is this K. K. K. and why does he hate this unhappy family?"
Holmes closed his eyes and said slowly: "The ideal reasoner can guess what happens next after he studies just one episode carefully. He can also guess the result which would follow. He can work in his study but he has to use all the knowledge he can get from around. If I remember right, in the early days of our friendship, you made a document..."
"Yes, it was a wonderful document. Philosophy, astronomy, and politics were marked at zero, I remember. Botany - a little better, geology - rather deep (you know where each mud stain comes from), chemistry eccentric, anatomy - unsystematic, sensational literature and crime records² - unique, violin player, boxer, lawyer, and smoker. Those, I think, were the main points."
Holmes smiled and said:
"Well, I say now, as I said then, that a man should keep in his head the information he needs every day, but the other knowledge he should put away, where he can get it if he wants it. Now, for this case we should use all our resources. Can you give me the American Encyclopedia which stands on the shelf
over there? First of all we may guess that Elias Openshaw had some very strong reason for leaving America. Men of his age do not change their way of life and leave the warm climate of Florida for the English one. It means that he was afraid of something. That's why he lived a lonely life and locked all his doors so carefully. But what was he afraid of? The only things that can help us are the letters. Now where did those letters come from? Did you see?"
"The first was from Pondicherry, the second from Dundee, and the third from London."
"Does that tell you anything?"
"They are all sea ports. Probably the writer was on a ship."
"Very good, my dear Watson. Elias got a letter from Pondicherry in India and seven weeks later he was killed. John's father got a letter from Dundee in Scotland and he was killed only three or four days later. What does that mean?"
"I can't see, my dear Watson."
"Well, I think that the letter came by steam ship, but a sailing ship (that is much slower) brought the killer."
"It's possible," said I.
"Do you see why I'm worried now? And now you see the danger that John Openshaw is in. This letter comes from London and it means the killer is in London too."
"Oh!" cried I. "What can it mean, this endless killing?"
"The papers Elias Openshaw brought with him from America are very important to the killer or killers. I think that there are two or three people, and they want to get the papers back. So I think K. K. K. belong to the name of an organization, not the name of a person..."
"But of what organization?"
"Have you never..." Sherlock Holmes was talking in a low voice "have you never heard of the Ku Klux Klan?"
"I never have."
Holmes opened the American Encyclopedia and said: "Here it is:
Ku. Klux. Klan. It sounds like the rifle getting ready to fire, This terrible secret organization started in the Southern States after the Civil War. They didn't want black Americans to have the same rights as white Americans. They killed anyone who didn't agree with them. To anyone who made them angry, they sent a warning. It usually was melon or orange pips. From then on he wasn't safe anywhere. He was waiting for death. Their way of working was so good that they were always successful. The American government couldn't end the years of terror until 1869."
"Yes," said I, "and 1869 was the year before Elias Openshaw came to England. He brought all their papers with him in the black box, so the organization could not go on. Of course they wanted to get the papers back. The burnt piece of paper we have seen, with its dates and names of when and to whom the orange pips were sent, are a great danger to the person who has it."
Holmes said, "We can do no more tonight. I believe that the only chance that Openshaw has is to do what I have told him."
The next morning the sun was shining, and Sherlock Holmes was at breakfast when I came down to him. I sat at the table and opened the newspaper.
"Holmes!" I cried and read to him:
"Between nine and ten last night a policeman heard a cry for help near Waterloo Bridge, Then he heard someone fall into the river. The people tried to help the poor but the night was too dark. Later the police took a body from the river. A letter found in his pocket showed that it was a man named Openshaw."
We sat in silence.
"That hurts me, Watson," Holmes said at last. "It really hurts me. That young man came to me for help, and I sent him away to his death! Now I'm going to find them, if it's the last thing I do!"
He walked up and down the room. Finally he went out of the house in a hurry and I didn't see him till evening. When Holmes came in, he was very tired and hungry but very pleased.
"Watson! I know the names of Openshaw's enemies! I'm going to send them a surprise! It will frighten them!"
"What do you mean?"
He had an orange in his hand. Holmes took out the pips and put five of them in a letter. On it he wrote:
Captain James Calhoun Sailing Ship "Lone Star", Georgia.
"And who is this captain?" I asked.
"He is the leader of these devils. I shall get the others too, but he is the first. I have spent all the day at the port of London and studied hundreds of the ship's papers. Only the ' Lone Star ' was in the three ports at the right times, and this morning she left London to sail back to Georgia. There are three Americans on board, I also found out that all three of them were away from the ship last night. They are the killers."
"When they arrive in Georgia, the steam ship will be there and the American police will get the other letter and get them."
Poor Sherlock Holmes! His plans came to nothing. He could do nothing about the weather. The winter storms were worse than ever, so the "Lone Star" never arrived in America. And the killers of John Openshaw never got the orange pips, but, in the end, death came to them.


The Adventure of the Beryl Coronet

 * New Visitor Tells His Story

"Holmes," I said looking out of the window down the road, "here is a madman coming along."
My friend left his armchair and came up to the window. It was a bright cold February morning. The snow was shining brightly in the winter sun. The strange man was coming along the road. He was about fifty years old and was wearing expensive clothes. He was running in a great hurry and his hands were moving up and down. He was shaking his head and making mad faces.
"What on earth is the matter with him?" I asked. "He is looking up at the number of the houses."
"I believe he is coming here, my dear Watson," said Holmes.
"Here?"
"Yes; I think he is coming to consult me professionally. Ha! Did I not tell you?"
As he spoke, the man ran up to our door and rang the bell, making a great noise.
A few minutes later he was in the room. He looked so worried and his face was so white that we were filled with pity. He was out of breath and for some time he could not speak. Sherlock Holmes made him sit down on the chair near the fire.
"Sir, you've come to tell me your story, haven't you?" he said. "You were in a hurry and have tired yourself. Have a rest and then I'll be most happy to look into your problem."
The man sat for a minute looking down, then he turned his face to us.
"You think I am mad, don't you?" he said.
"As far as I can see, you have some great trouble," answered Holmes.
"God knows I have!! The trouble is so sudden and terrible. And it is not I alone. The most noble in the country will have great problems if I cannot find an answer to this terrible problem. You are my last hope, Mr. Holmes."
"Tell me who you are and what your problem is, sir, and I will try to help you," said Holmes.
"My name," answered the visitor, "is Alexander Holder. I am the head of the Bank of Holder and Stevenson in London."
The name was well known and we waited for an unusual story.
"I feel that there is no time to lose and that's why I was in a hurry on the way here. The police inspector advised me to come to you. Now when I feel better, I'm going to tell you my story as short and clear as I can.
"Yesterday morning I was sitting in my office. A bank officer came to say that a visitor wanted to see me. I was surprised
to hear the visitor ' s name: it was a very famous one, known all over the world one of the highest and most noble names in England. When he came in I understood that he was in a hurry, and rather worried.
' Mr. Holder!' he said. ' I know that you often lend money to people. It is most important to have fifty thousand pounds at once."
' Can you leave with me something of value to keep until you bring the money back?' I said.
' Yes. Perhaps you have heard of the Beryl Coronet?'
' One of the most expensive things in the country? Certainly I have.'
"The visitor opened his case. Inside there lay the most beautiful piece of jewellery.
' There are thirty-nine large beryls,' he said. ' Its price is... I think it is twice more. So I will leave it with you.'
"I took the coronet in my hands and looked at the man.
' Ah, you think it is not mine. Well, I would certainly not do so if I were not sure that I shall be able to ask you for it in four days' time, when I am able to repay you the money. All I ask is that it be secret, and that you take care of the crown.
There will be great trouble if anything wrong happens to it.'
"I called for his bank officer and ordered him to pay out fifty thousand pounds to the visitor. When this visitor left the bank, I looked at the coronet and thought: ' Why did I agree to keep it?' But it was too late to change anything, so I locked it up in my safe. When the evening came I decided that it was not clever to leave it at the bank. ' I'll carry the  coronet in the case with me for the next few days, I thought. So I went home, carrying the Beryl Coronet in the case. When I came home I took it upstairs and locked it in the desk of my dressing room.
"You know, Mr. Holmes, I am not a married man but in my house I have my son Arthur and a young girl Mary my
niece. There are two servants, who don't sleep in the house, and three women servants who I believe absolutely. My son is the only trouble maker. People tell me I have spoiled him '. When my wife died he was all I had to love.
"Arthur doesn't want to work in the bank. He has an easy life with his rich friends. He enjoys parties and horses and playing cards. His friends are rich, and so he spends more money than I give him.
"Sir George Burnwell is one of his friends and he often comes to our house. He is much older than Arthur, one who has been everywhere and seen everything. He is a brilliant talker, and a man of great personal beauty. But I don't trust him.
"Mary is the daughter of my brother who died five years ago. She is sweet, loving and beautiful, and as quiet and gentle as a woman should be. I don't know what I would do without her. Twice Arthur asked her to marry him, but twice she said ' no ' to him.
"Now, Mr. Holmes, you know the people who live under my roof, and I shall go on with my story.
"When we were having coffee that night after dinner, I told Arthur and Mary about the Beryl Coronet. ' What a day I've had! I have to look after it until next week. It's too expensive to leave at the bank, so I must keep it with me for a few days.' ' Where have you put it?" asked Arthur. ' In my dressing room upstairs, it is locked in the desk.' ' Well, I hope thieves won't get inside our house at night,' said Arthur. ' Oh, any old key will open it. When I was young, I often opened it myself.' When our dinner was over, Arthur followed me into my room.
' Look, father,' he said, ' can you let me have two hundred pounds?'
' No, I can't,' I answered angrily.
' You have been very kind,' said Arthur, ' but I must have the money, or I won't be able to meet my friends again.'
' I hope you will not!'
' All right, but you don't want me to bring shame on your name. I must have the money, and if you won't give it to me, I'll try to find it.'
"I was very angry because it was the third time during the month. Arthur left the room and I opened the desk, saw that the coronet was safe and closed it again. Then I started to go round the house and make sure that every door and every window was closed. Downstairs I saw Mary. She was standing near the window. When I came up to her she quickly closed and locked it.
' Tell me, dad,' said she, looking a little worried, ' did you let Lucy go out tonight?"
' Certainly not.'
' She came in just now by the back door. I am sure that she has been out to see someone, but I think that it is hardly safe and should be stopped.'
' You must speak to her in the morning, or I will. Are you sure that everything is locked?"
' Quite sure, dad.'
' Then, good-night.' I kissed her and went up to my bedroom again, where I was soon asleep."

 * Arthur! The Thief!

"I am not a heavy sleeper and about two o'clock in the morning I woke up. I was listening with all my ears. Suddenly I heard a small noise, there were footsteps about in the sitting room. Quietly I got up and went there.
' Arthur! You thief. How can you touch the crown!' My unhappy son was dressed only in shirt and trousers. He had the coronet in his hands. When he heard my words, he dropped the coronet and his face turned white.
' You have destroyed it! You have brought shame on me forever! Where are the beryls you have stolen?'
' Stolen!' cried Arthur.
' Yes, you thief! My own son is a thief!"
' But there is nothing missing ', beryls cannot be missing."
' There are three missing. And you know where they are. You are a liar as well as a thief! I saw it with my own eyes.'
' You have called me enough bad names. I won't say another word. I'll leave your house in the morning and you will never see me again.'
' You will get in the hands of the police!'
"At that time everyone in the house woke up. Mary was the first to run into the room, and when she saw the crown and Arthur, she went white and fell on the floor. I sent for the police. When they arrived, Arthur asked me if I wanted to ask the police to take him away. But I explained him that the Beryl Coronet belonged to the country.
of us ' Let me leave the house for five minutes. It will help both please believe me.'
' Then you will run away, or hide what you have stolen. Tell me what you have done with the beryls and I can save you from the shame. I have caught you with the coronet.'
"But all I could do then was to let the police take my son away. The police spent a lot of time looking for stolen beryls but they found nothing. They were puzzled, and did not know what to do.
' My advice to you, sir,' said the officer, ' is to go to Mr. Sherlock Holmes, who lives in Baker Street. He is a great detective, and this is the sort of case he has often helped the police with.'
"You can ask for as much money as you like. My God, what shall I do! I have lost my honour and my son in one night! Oh, what shall I do!"

 * Holmes Asks Questions

Sherlock Holmes sat silent for some minutes watching the fire.
"Do many friends come to your house?" Holmes asked.
"Very few. They are my partner with his family and a friend of my son Arthur, Sir George Burnwell. No one else, I think."
"Well, do you often go out?"
"Arthur does. Mary and I always stay at home."
"That is not usual for a young girl."
"She is a quiet girl. Not so very young. She is twenty-four."
"That night was a shock to her, wasn't it?"
"Terrible! I think she feels worse than I do."
"Then you are both sure that your son has stolen the beryls?"
"I saw him myself, with the coronet in his hands."
"God bless you! You are trying hard to help him, and me. But it is too difficult. What was he doing there? And why didn't he make up a lie? What did the police think about the noise that woke you?"
"They thought it was the noise of the Arthur ' s closing door."
"I don't think so. A thief never makes a noise loud enough to wake up all the people in the house. The beryls the police doing about them?" what are
"They are looking everywhere under the floors - in the furniture hoping to find them in the house."
"Have they thought of looking outside the house?"
"Yes. In the garden."
"Now, my dear sir," said Holmes, "don't you see that this case is not so simple as you and the police think? You think
that your son came down from his bed, went to your dressing room, found the coronet, broke off a piece of it, then went somewhere to hide this piece so cleverly indeed that no one can find it and then returned to the room. Do you really believe it? I'd like to go with you to your house, and see everything with my own eyes."
Holmes asked me to go with them. I followed them with great pleasure because I wanted to see Holmes at work. When I was listening to Mr. Holder, I believed that Arthur had stolen the beryls. But deep in my heart I trusted Sherlock Holmes, and I was sure there was some hope for the boy, and another explanation for the missing beryls.
Mr. Holder was glad to have that small hope too.

* Holmes Gets Answers

The house where Mr. Holder lived was made of white stone and rather big. A wide road led to the house, and on the right side there was a small path, leading from the road to the kitchen door. The other small path led to the stables. It was winter and white deep snow covered the big garden.
Holmes walked slowly all round the house again and again, and then he went down the small kitchen path, and through the garden to the back of the house. He walked so long that Mr. Holder and I went into the dining room and waited for him by the fire. We were sitting there in silence when the door opened and a young lady came in. She was not very tall, slim, with dark hair and dark eyes. I don't think I have ever seen such a pale white face. Her lips were colourless too and her eyes were red with crying. She didn't look at me but came up to her uncle.
"Have you told them to free Arthur, dad?"
"No, no, Mary. The police..."
"But I'm sure he has done nothing. I know it, and I know you'll be sorry for it."
"Why is he silent, then, if he didn't steal the beryls?"
"Who knows?"
"But I saw him with the coronet in his hand!"
"Oh, but perhaps he just wanted to look at it. It is so terrible to think of our dear Arthur in prison."
"Not until they find the beryls. I have brought a gentleman from London to look more deeply into the case."
"This gentleman?" she asked, looking at me.
"No. His friend. He wanted us to leave him alone. He is in the stable lane ' now."
"What can he hope to find there? Ah! This, I think, is he. I believe, sir, that you will be able to prove that Arthur hasn't done anything."
"I agree with you, young lady and I think that we can prove it. I believe you must be Miss Mary Holder. May I ask you one or two questions?"
"Please do, sir, if it may be of any help."
"You heard nothing yourself last night?"
"Nothing, until my uncle here began to speak loudly. I heard that and came down."
"You locked the windows and doors the night before. Did you lock all the windows?"
"Yes."
"Were they all locked in the morning?"
"Yes."
"You have a girl servant who has a sweet - heart? I think that you told your uncle last night that she went to see him?"
"Yes, and she was the girl who waited in the drawing - room and who could hear uncle's story about the coronet."
"I see. You think that perhaps she went out to tell her sweet heart, and that the two had a plan."
"But what is the good of all these theories," cried the banker, "when I told you that I saw Arthur with the coronet in his hands?"
"Wait a little, Mr. Holder. We must come back to that. About this girl, Miss Holder. You saw her return by the kitchen door?"
"Yes; when I went to see if the door was locked for the night I saw her. I saw the man, too."
"Do you know him?"
"Oh, yes! he is the green grocer who brings our vegetables. His name is Francis Prosper."
"He stood," said Holmes, "to the left of the door up the path."
"Yes, he did."
"And he is a man with a wooden leg?"
They saw something like fear in the young lady's expressive black eyes. "Why, you are like a magician," said she. "How do you know that?" She smiled, but there was no answering smile in Holmes ' s thin face and he said:
"I would like to go upstairs, then to go over the outside of the house again. But first I'll take a look at the windows on the ground floor."
Holmes walked quickly from window to window. He opened the large one which looked from the hall to the stable lane. He was watching outside.
"Now let's go upstairs," he said at last.
In the banker ' s sitting room, he came up to the case where the crown was. He studied the lock. He opened the case and took out the coronet. It was bent and one corner was missing.
"Now, Mr Holder," said Holmes, "will you try to break off the other corner of the coronet?"
The banker looked very surprised.
"I won't try," he said.
"Then I will." Holmes suddenly tried to break the coronet, but with no result.
"I feel it move a little," he said, "but I can't break it. I don't think anyone could."
"I don't know what to think. It is all dark to me '," said Holder.
"Your son had no shoes on when you saw him?"
"He had his trousers and a shirt."
"Thank you. Well, I think, now I'll go outside. Stay here because some extra footprints will make the task more difficult."
When Sherlock Holmes came back, about an hour later, his feet were white with snow, but he had nothing much to say.
"I think I have seen now all that there is to see, Mr. Holder. I'm going home now."
"But the beryls, Mr. Holmes. Where are they?"
"I cannot tell."
The banker looked very unhappy.
"I shall never see them again!" he cried. "And my son? Can you give me any hope?"
"I think he hasn't done anything."
"Then what happened in my house last night?"
"If you come to me tomorrow morning I'll be happy to do what I can to help you. Are you ready to spend a large sum of money?"
"Anything to get the beryls back!"
I was sure that Holmes knew the answer to all Holder ' s questions but what it was that was a mystery to me. On our way home I tried to get the answer but Holmes was quiet and didn't say a word. When we were back home, he hurried to his room and was down again in a few minutes dressed like a beggar wearing old dirty clothes.
I was having my tea when he came back. He looked very pleased.
"I haven't finished yet. I'm going out again in a minute."
"Where to?"
"Oh, the other side of London. I'll be back late, so don't wait up for me."
"How are you getting on? Are you having any luck?" I asked.
"Oh, so - so. I have been to Holder ' s house. Now I must change back to my own clothes." And off he went again dressed in his usual way.
I waited for him up to the midnight and then I went to my room. In the morning when I came down for breakfast in the morning, there he was with a cup of coffee in one hand and a newspaper in the other. He was quite fresh and pleased.

 * The missing Beryls

In a minute Mr. Holder came into the room. I was shocked by the change, which had come over him. He looked very ill and tired out.
"I don't know what I have done to be so tired," he said. "Only two days ago I was a happy man without a trouble in the world. Now I am alone. My son is a thief and he is in prison and my niece Mary has left me too."
"Left you?"
"Yes. Her room was empty in the morning, and there was a letter for me on the hall table"
He gave the letter to Holmes and he read:
My dearest uncle:
I feel that I have brought trouble on you. Why did I not act differently? I can't, with this thought in my mind, stay in your  house, so I must leave you forever. Don't worry about me. I can look after myself. Please don't look for me. In life or death I am your loving,
Mary
"What can she mean?" asked Holder.
"I don't know, sir, but I think it is very good that she has gone. Soon your troubles will end."
"Have you heard something, Mr. Holmes? You have learned something! Where are the beryls?"
"Are you ready to pay one thousand pounds for each of them?" Holmes asked quietly.
"I've got ten thousand with me."
"No. Three thousand will do, and I would like the money now."
When Holmes got the money, he came up to his desk and took out a little piece of gold with three beryls in it, and put it in front of Holder.
"You have it!" he cried. "I am saved! I am saved! Then it was not Arthur who took them? Then let us hurry to him at once, and let him know the truth."
"He knows it. I have told him. He didn't want to tell me, so I told him what had happened."
"What is this mystery, then?"
"First of all, I must tell you something that will hurt you very much. Your Mary and Sir George Burnwell have run away together."
"My Mary? Impossible!"
"It is true. You and your son did not know the true character of the man. He is one of the most dangerous men in England - a man without heart. Mary knew nothing of such men. She believed him when he told her that he loved her. The devil knows what he told her but she followed all his orders. They met every evening."
"I cannot believe you, I will not believe it!" cried the banker. His face was pale.
"I will tell you what happened in your house that night. When you went to bed, Mary came to the hall. She opened the big window and talked to Sir George Burnwell, who was outside. I saw his deep foot marks in the snow, and I am sure he was there for a long time. She told him about the coronet. He orders her to steal the coronet. Your son Arthur didn't sleep well that night, because of his quarrel with you. Then, in the middle of the night, he heard someone go quietly in the corridor. He looked out and saw Mary going into your dressing room. He waited in the dark watching.
"When Mary came out of the room with the coronet in her hands, he could hardly believe his eyes. He followed her quietly. She went downstairs, opened the window, and gave the coronet to someone outside. Then she closed the window and ran back to her room. At that moment your son was hiding behind the curtain.
"He loved Mary and he could do no harm to her. But when she left, he opened the window and jumped into the snow, where he could see a figure of a man in the moonlight. It was Sir George Burnwell. He tried to get away but Arthur caught him and there was a fight between them. Suddenly the coronet broke, and Arthur had it in his hands. He ran back, closed the window and went to your dressing room. He was going to put the coronet back into your desk when you found him there."
"Is it possible?" asked Mr. Holder.
"You made him angry. You called him bad names, when he saved the coronet, and he decided not to tell you the truth."
"So that was why Mary went white and fell down on the floor when she saw the coronet! What a fool I am! When Arthur asked to go out into the garden for five minutes, he wanted to go and find the missing piece of it."
Holmes said, "When I arrived at the house, I at once went into the garden, I watched the footprints in the snow. I saw Arthur ' s foot marks without shoes on. I saw the place where they
had a fight, so I knew I was right. Sir George Burnwell's foot marks went to the end of the lane."
"But how did you find out that it was Sir George?"
"You told me that you did not have many visitors in your house. I remembered only Sir George. I knew his name. I knew enough of him so at night I went to his house as a beggar, and asked his servant for some old clothes. What luck! He gave me some shoes (they were wet) and told me that his master had thrown them out that day. Then I took the shoes to your house and found they were the same size as the foot marks in the snow."
"I saw a beggar in my garden yesterday evening," said Mr. Holder.
"It was me. I found that I had my man. So I came home and changed my clothes. Now, I had to get the beryls back from him! At first he didn't want to listen to me. But when he saw that I knew everything, he took up a heavy stick and wanted to have a fight with me. I pointed my pistol at him and told that I could give him a lot of money for the beryls. That's how I got them back!
"Then I visited your son in the prison, and at last got to bed at two o'clock in the morning. A really hard day's work!"
"A day which has saved England from a great public shame," said the banker, and he rose from his chair. "Sir, I can't find the words to thank you. You are a greater detective than people have told me. I must go at once to my dear son. As for Mary, it goes to my very heart, but even you cannot tell me where she is now."
"I think that we may say," said Holmes, "that she is with Sir George Burnwell. And that, poor girl, is her punishment."


The Crooked Man

 * Colonel ' s Death

One summer night I was sitting near the fire and smoking. I was very tired after the busy day. Suddenly there was a bell. I looked at the clock. It was about midnight. Too late for a visitor. I went out into the hall and opened the door.
It was Sherlock Holmes.
"Ah, Watson," said he, "I hoped that you were not in bed."
"My dear friend, please, come in."
"You look surprised, and no wonder! Could you put me up tonight?!"
"With pleasure."
"You told me that you had a guest room. I see that you have no gentleman visitor tonight. Not a hat, not a coat in the hall."
"I'll be happy if you stay."
"Thank you. If you are not going to sleep right now, I'll smoke a pipe with you."
We sat down in the armchairs and smoked in silence. I knew that only a very important business could bring him to me at such an hour. So I waited. Suddenly Holmes said:
"Now, my dear Watson, I'm working at a very interesting case. I'll solve the problem, I am sure. But... Can I ask you for help? Could you go to Aldershot tomorrow?"
"Certainly," I answered.
"Then, if you are not too sleepy, I will give you a sketch of what has happened. And of what we are going to do. Have you read about murder of Colonel Barclay at Aldershot? I am investigating the case."
"I have heard nothing of it."
"The facts are only two days old. James Barclay was a brave and talented commander in India. Many years ago Colonel Barclay married a young and beautiful woman Nancy Devoy. They were a happy family. Nobody heard of any misunderstanding between them. But some people say that Colonel loved his wife more than she loved him. But there was absolutely nothing to prepare people for the tragedy. Usually Colonel Barclay was a kind and pleasant man. Sometimes he became angry and aggressive, sometimes he was sad and silent. But he was never angry with his wife. When depression came on him, he spent all his days at home and never stayed in the dark room.
"Colonel Barclay and his wife lived in a big and nice house. There is a big garden around it. One side of the house is near the road. They had few servants and no children. They didn't often have visitors at their house.
"Mrs. Barclay was Catholic and she was often busy at the church meetings. She helped poor people to get clothes and
food. Last Monday Mrs. Barclay was in a hurry for the meeting. She had a quick dinner and left home. Then she visited Miss Morrison, a young lady who lives in the next house. Then the two ladies went together to their meeting. It lasted forty minutes. At a quarter - past nine Mrs. Barclay returned home.
"Their sitting room faces the road and has a large glass door. The big green lawn is in front of the house. It was into this room that' Mrs. Barclay came first. Then she asked her servant to bring a cup of tea there. When the Colonel heard his wife's voice, he came to the sitting room. The servant was the last person who saw the Colonel alive.
"Ten minutes later the tea was ready and the servant was on
her way to the sitting room. When she came up to the door, she
heard the loud and angry voices of the Colonel and his wife. She
knocked at the door but there was no answer. The servant wanted 
to open the door but it was locked. Naturally she ran down to
tell the cook, and the two women with a man servant came up
into the hall. They could hear two angry voices - of Barclay and
of his wife. Barclay's words were quick and quiet. The lady's words
were clear and loud. ' You coward!' she said again and again. ' What
can be done now?2 What can be done now? Give me back my
life.' Then there was a sudden dreadful man's cry, a crash, and a
woman's scream. The man servant understood that some tragedy had happened. The door was locked and he decided to get into the sitting room from outside through the glass door.
"It was open. The servant ran inside and saw the lady lying on the sofa. Her eyes were closed but she was alive. On the floor, with his legs on the armchair, in the pool of blood, there lay the Colonel. He was dead.
"The servant couldn't do anything for his master, so he tried to open the room door. But he couldn't find the key. So
he went out again through the glass window and called a policeman and a doctor.
"The doctor asked the servants to carry the lady in the bedroom. She was still unconscious. Then they put the Colonel's body on the sofa and examined it carefully.
"At the back of the Colonel's head there was a long cut. On the floor, near the body, was lying a club of hard wood with a bone handle². The Colonel had a big collection of weapons. He brought them from different countries. But that club was not from his collection. The police found nothing interesting in the room. They also didn't find the key it was gone.
"These are the facts I got on the Tuesday morning when I came to Aldershot."

 * Crooked Man and Strange Animal

"You can see, dear Watson, that the case is rather interesting, but when I learned the details I realized that it was extraordinary³!
"First I questioned to the servants, but they told me nothing new. Only one servant - Jane Stewart remembered an interesting detail. She heard that the lady said the name ' David ' twice. The colonel ' s name, you remember, was James.
"There was one more thing in the case. The servants and the police were shocked by the colonel ' s face. It had the most dreadful expression of fear and horror! The police had a theory that the Colonel wife had killed him.
"But the poor woman couldn't explain anything. She was absolutely ill and nearly out of reason.
"From the police I learned that Miss Morrison said that she had no idea why Mrs. Barclay got angry with the Colonel.
"I had to smoke some pipes before I could put all the facts in order. The missing door key! That was the most important point. It didn't disappear, somebody had taken it. It means there was a third person in the room. And that third person came in through the window. You know my methods, Watson. I examined the traces on the lawn. Now I know there was a man in the room. I found his foot marks: one on the road, two on the lawn, and two near the window. But it was not the man who surprised me. It was his companion."
"His companion!" I cried.
Holmes took some cloth out of his pocket.
"What do you make of that?" he asked.
The paper was covered with foot marks of some small animal. It had long nails on its feet.
"It's a dog," said I.
"Did you ever hear of a dog running up a curtain? I found its marks on the curtains."
"A monkey, then?"
"But it is not the print of a monkey."
"What can it be, then?"
"Neither dog nor cat nor monkey nor any creature that people keep as a pet. I think the creature is about two feet long². May be it has a tail. The animal has a long body and very short legs. What a pity I haven't found any of his hair! And it is a meat eater."
"Why do you think so?"
"Because it ran up the curtain. A bird's cage was in the window, and it wanted to get the bird."
"Then what was the beast?"
"Ah, that's the problem."
"But why is it so important to you, Holmes?"
"I don't know the answer but I am sure of it. We have learnt a lot. We know that a man stood in the road. He was looking at the quarrel between the Barclays. We know, also, that he ran across the lawn, got into the room, had a strange animal with him. Then... Did he strike the colonel with his club? Did the Colonel fall down when he saw the stranger? I don't know yet. Finally we have the fact that the man carried away the key."
"I think your discoveries made the case more difficult, than it was before," said I.
"You are right. But it means that the case is much more difficult than I thought first. But really, Watson, it is too late. I'll tell you my ideas on our way to Aldershot tomorrow."
"Thank you, my dear friend. But you have stopped at the most interesting place. Can you tell me some more now?"
"Well, I am sure that when Mrs. Barclay left the house at half past seven, she wasn't angry with her husband at all. The servants say that she was never angry and always spoke with her husband in a friendly way. But when she returned home, she went to the sitting room. It means she didn't want to see her husband. She asked for tea. It means she was unhappy. When the Colonel came into the sitting room, the scandal began. I can see that something happened between seven thirty and nine o'clock. She turned into a different woman angry and aggressive.
"But Miss Morrison was with the lady all the evening. She knew something but didn't want to tell. So I decided to talk to Miss Morrison. I was sure she knew something and explained to the young woman that Mrs. Barclay was in great danger. She is ill and even can't help herself.
' I promised my friend that I would say nothing, and a promise is a promise,' said she; ' but if I can really help her... I will tell you what happened on Monday evening.
' I thought you had been dead this thirty years, Henry,' she said in a shaking voice.
' So I have,' said he. He had a very dark face like in a bad dream. His hair were grey, and he looked like a very old man.
' Can you walk on a little way, dear?" said Mrs. Barclay to me; ' I want to have a word with this man. There is nothing to be afraid of. She tried to speak quietly, but she was still white and trembling.
' I did as she asked me, and they talked together for a few minutes. She didn't say a word on our way home. At my door she took me by the hand and asked me not to tell what had happened.'
' I have known him for a long time. He has been so unlucky!' said she. I promised her I would say nothing. She kissed me, and I have never seen her since.'
"As you see, Watson, it was like a light on a dark night. I had to find the man. But was he still in Aldershot? I spent a day and by evening this very evening, Watson, I found him. His name is Henry Wood. He has only been five days in the town. The man is a travelling magician. In the evening he performs in the cafes and restaurants. He carries some strange creature in his box. He uses it in some of his tricks. Sometimes he speaks in a strange language and for the last two nights he had 
been heard crying in his bedroom. The maid said he paid a strange coin for the room. It was an Indian rupee, Watson.
"So now, my dear friend, you know everything. You can see that after the ladies went home, this man followed them. He saw the quarrel between husband and wife through the window. Then he ran into the room and that creature escaped from the box. That is all very certain. But he is the only person in this world who can tell us exactly what happened in that room."
"And are you going to ask him?"
"Yes, and I need a witness."
"But how do you know he'll be there?"
"I told one of my Baker Street boys to watch him. We shall find him in Hudson Street tomorrow, Watson. Now, let's go to sleep!"


 * Providence

We came to the town in the afternoon and at once went to Hudson Street.
"This is the street," said he at last. A boy ran up to us and said, "He's in, Mr. Holmes."
"Come along, Watson. This is the house."
In a moment we were face to face with the man. It was a warm day but he was sitting near the burning fire. The man's back was deformed and crooked. His face was worn and dark, but it was clear that it was of great beauty long time ago. He pointed at two chairs.
"Mr. Henry Wood, late of India, I believe," said Holmes.
"I want to ask you some questions about Colonel Barclay's death."
"What should I know about that?"
"That's what I want to find out. I think you know that Mrs. Barclay will be tried for murder²."
"I don't know who you are," the man cried, "nor how you know about me, but will you tell me if it is true?"
"Why, the police are waiting for her to come to her senses³. Then they will arrest her."
"She didn't kill him."
"Then you did."
"No, I did not."
"Who killed Colonel James Barclay, then?"
"Nobody. It was the just Providence that killed him. You want me to tell the story? Well, you see me now with my back like a camel. But there was a time when Corporal Henry Wood was handsome. That time we were in India. Barclay was sergeant in the same company. The most beautiful girl was Nancy Devoy. There were two men that loved her. She loved the one who is sitting in front of you. Well, I had her heart. But her father wanted her to marry Barclay. He was rich and well - educated. One day we got into a great trouble. It was a trap. In a week we ran out of water. We couldn't fight any more and the only chance was to get out of siege and ask for help. I had to do my best. I talked it over with Sergeant Barclay, because he knew the country very well. He drew a map for me to follow. At ten o'clock I started on my journey. In ten minutes I walked into our enemies. They were waiting for me. I became their prisoner. From their words I understood that my friend had betrayed me '. I tried to get away, but they caught me. They tortured me again and again. My back and all my bones were broken. I could hardly learn to walk. Finally I got my chance and escaped. I went north and found myself in Afghanistan. There I travelled and learnt the art of travelling magicians. I didn't want to return to England. My friends and my family thought I was dead.
"But when you get old, you start thinking about home. I remembered the bright green fields of England and decided to see them. I saved some money, and then I came here. I know what soldiers like and can make enough money for living."
"Your story is most interesting," said Sherlock Holmes. "I have already heard of your meeting with Mrs. Barclay. Then you followed her home and saw the quarrel through the window. She told him everything she knew. You ran across the lawn and ran into the room."
"I did, sir, and when he saw me, his face turned into the mask of horror and he fell down. But he was dead before he fell. I read death on his face."
"And then?"
"Then Nancy fell unconscious, and I took the door key from her hand. I wanted to unlock it and get help. But then I decided to get away. I didn't want my secret to come out. In a hurry I put the door key in my pocket and lost my stick. Teddy ran up the curtain and I got him down. When I got him into his box, I was off as fast as I could run."
"Who's Teddy?" asked Holmes. The man opened the box and we saw a beautiful reddish - brown creature, thin and quick, with a long, thin nose, and a pair of the finest red eyes that ever I saw in an animal ' s head.
"It's a mongoose," I cried.
"Well, some call them that," said the man. "Snake catcher is what I call them, and Teddy is quick on cobras. I have one, and Teddy catches it every night on the performance."
"Well, can we come to you again if Mrs. Barclay is in serious trouble?"
"In that case, of course."
We left him. When we were walking along the street a policeman came up to us.
"Ah, Holmes," he said, "I think you have heard about the case. It has come to nothing!" "What then?" "The doctors say he died of heart attack. You see it was a very simple case after all." "Oh, yes," said Holmes, smiling. "Come, Watson, I don't think we can return to London." "There's one thing," said I as we walked down to the station. "The husband ' s name was James, and the other was Henry, why did she say ' David '?" "She told about David from the Bible!!"


A Scandal in Bohemia

 * Holmes ' Method and King's Mistake

To Sherlock Holmes she was always the Woman. He never told about her in any other words. Sherlock Holmes didn't feel any love for Irene Adler. He didn't feel love for anybody. He had too cold and too balanced mind. Sometimes he looked like a machine. He never spoke of love seriously. But there was one woman to him, and that woman was Irene Adler.
When I got married, I didn't see Holmes. My friend Sherlock Holmes went on living in his house in Baker Street. The study of crime that interested him! Sometimes I heard about his work and success from the newspapers but I really knew little of my dear friend.
One night it was on the 20th of March 1888-I was coming home and my way led me through Baker Street. Suddenly I decided to see Holmes again. From the dark street I could see that his windows were bright. I saw his tall figure in one of them. He was walking around the room quickly, with his head down and his hands behind him. He was at work again! I rang the bell and came in.
I couldn't say he was very happy to see me, but he was glad, I think. He pointed at the armchair near the fire and at the box of cigars. Then he stood before the fire and looked at me carefully, in his own special way.
"You are happy with your wife, Watson, aren't you?" he said at last. "I think that you have put on seven and a half pounds since I saw you."
"Seven!" I answered.
"No, a little more. And you work again, I see. You did not tell me that you wanted to work."
"Then, how do you know?"
"I see it, I deduce it.2 How do I know that you got very wet a day or two ago, and that your servant is not a good one?"
"My dear Holmes," said I, "this is too much. It is true that I had a country walk on Thursday. I came home absolutely wet. But now I am wearing different clothes. How do you deduce it? As to Mary Jane, my servant... my wife told me many times, but again I can't understand how you work it out³."
He smiled and rubbed his long, nervous hands together.
"It is easy, believe me," said he, "there are some parallel cuts on your left shoe. It means that the person who cleaned the shoes was careless. How did I work out that you started medical practice? Well, a gentleman walks into my rooms smelling of medicine, with a hidden stethoscope in his hat. Who is he? It's not a difficult question."
I smiled because his explanation of his famous process of deduction was fantastic! "When I listen to you," I said, "I always think that it is very easy. And each next time I am always shocked with the way it works."
"You are right," he answered and sat down into an armchair with a cigarette. "You see, but you do not observe. For example, you have often seen the steps from the hall to this room."
"Very often."
"How often?"
"Well, some hundreds of times."
"Then how many are there?"
"How many? I don't know."
"You have seen, but you have not observed. They are seventeen! You are interested in these little problems, aren't you? I think it will interest you." He gave me a thick, pink letter. "It came by the last post," said he. "Read it aloud."
It was a letter without a date, a name and an address.
"Tonight somebody will visit you, at a quarter to eight o'clock," it said, "a gentleman wants to consult you on a very secret business. You have helped some important people of royal families. You have shown that you are a noble man. We hope, you can help us, too. Get ready to see your visitor wearing a mask."
"This is a mystery," I said. "What do you think it means?"
"I have no idea because I have no facts. What do you deduce from it?"
I looked at the writing and the paper on which it was written.
"The man is rich," I said. "The paper is not cheap. It is very strong and white. It's strange paper. I have never seen such paper."
"It is not English paper at all. Look at it in the light! Can you see that it was made in Bohemia? I think that a German
wrote the letter. The word order is wrong, he put the words in the German way. Ah, here comes our visitor now."
"Shall I leave, Holmes?"
"No, no, I need your help. I think we'll hear something very interesting," said Holmes and we heard a strong knock at the door.
"Come in!" called Holmes.
A tall and strong man came into the room. He looked like Hercules in rich dress. "For an Englishman his dress is too rich and too bright," I thought. Besides, he was wearing a black mask.
"Have you got my letter?" he asked with a strong German accent.
"Please, take a seat," said Holmes. "I'm Sherlock Holmes. And this is my friend, Dr. Watson. He helps me a lot in my cases. How can I call you, please?"
"You can call me Count Von Kramm. I come from Bohemia. My case is a secret one and very important. Will you and your friend keep it in a secret?"
"I will," we said together.
"A noble and important person from a royal family has sent me to you. He asks for help. I'm wearing a mask because nobody must know about my visit. If you can't help, there will be a great scandal in the Bohemian Royal Family."
"I know, Your Majesty," said Holmes. He was sitting in his armchair smoking a cigarette.
Our visitor jumped up from his chair. He started to go up and down the room, then stopped, took off his mask and threw it on the floor.
"You are right," he cried, "I am the King. But how do you know who I am? Yes, I am the King of Bohemia. I have come to consult you."
"Very well. Go on," said Holmes. He was sitting with his eyes closed and listening carefully.
"Five years ago I met Irene Adler. I think you know this name..."
"Let me see!" said Holmes. "Hum! Born in 1858. Famous singer, very beautiful, lives in London. Your Majesty, as I understand, loved her and wrote her some letters. Now you want to get them back."
"You are right. But how..."
"Did you marry here secretly?"
"No."
"I think, you can always say that you didn't write those letters, if she shows them."
"But my writing..."
"Copied."
"My paper."
"Stolen."
"My photograph."
"Bought."
"We were both in the photograph."
"Oh, dear!? That is very bad! That was a mistake, Your Majesty."
"I was madly in love, I was so young... But now I must get it back."
"Did you try to buy it?"
"She will not sell."
"Did you try to steal it?"
"We tried five times. But my men didn't find it."
Holmes laughed. "It is a very nice problem. What is she going to do with the photo?" said he.
"You know, when I left Irene Adler, she was very angry with me. Now she has a chance to ruin me. Soon I am going to marry Clotilde Lothman. She is the second daughter of the King of Scandinavia. This marriage is very important because we are from the most important royal families in Europe. If Clotilde knows about Irene and me, that will be a great scandal."
"And Irene Adler?"
"She says she will send the photograph to Clotilde ' s family. I am afraid she will keep her promise. We must find the photo before she sends it! We have three days yet."
"Oh, I am sure that we will find," said Holmes with a yawn. "Your Majesty will, of course, stay in London?"
"Certainly. You will find me at the Langham Hotel under the name of Count Von Kramm."
"Then I'll write to you to tell you what happens. And her address?" Holmes asked.
"Is Briony Lodge, Serpentine Avenue, St. John ' s Wood." "Then, good-night, Your Majesty," said Holmes. The King left and Holmes turned to me "Good-night, Watson. Please, come back tomorrow at 3 o'clock in the afternoon."

 * Secret Marriage

At 3 o'clock I was at Baker Street, but Holmes was not at home. So I waited him in his study. It was about 4 o'clock when the door opened and a very strange person walked into the room. He was an old man with a red face and he looked drunk. He was wearing poor and rather old clothes. He came up to me but I had to look at him three times before I saw it was my friend - Holmes!
He smiled and went to the bathroom to change his clothes.
Ten minutes later an English gentleman was sitting in front of the fire and telling me his story.
"It's very funny. I've had a nice time, really! I left home at 8 o'clock this morning. I was wearing a servant ' s dress. I wanted to become friends with her servants. Servants are always happy to talk. Soon I found her house and walked round it. It is a lovely big house, with a garden at the back. Large sitting room on the ground floor, with long windows which are easy to open. I found some horsemen and heard a lot about the young woman Miss Adler.
"And what of Irene Adler?" I asked.
"Oh, she lives quietly, sings at concerts. She doesn't go out often but she has got a friend. He is Godfrey Norton, the lawyer. He is dark and handsome and visits her every day. Is she his client or his friend? Do they love each other? If he is her lawyer, perhaps she has given him the photograph. If they are in love, she won't show it to him. I want you to know the story in detail."
"Very interesting, Holmes!" I said.
"When I was there, a cab drove up to Miss Adler ' s house. Mr. Norton jumped out of it. He was in a great hurry, shouted to the cab man to wait and came in the house. He was in the house about half an hour, and then came out even in a greater hurry. ' Drive like the devil,' he shouted, ' to the Church of St. Monica!' Some minutes later Miss Adler ran out of her home and jumped into a cab. ' To the Church of St. Monica!' she cried. I had to follow them and jumped into a cab. When I arrived, I came into the church. There were three people there: Mr. Norton, Miss Adler and a churchman. When Mr. Norton saw me he ran up to me.
"Thank God," he cried. "Come! Come!"
"What then?" I asked.
"Come, man, come, only three minutes."
"So I helped Mr. Norton to marry Miss Adler. They had to find a witness and they found him. It was me, my dear Watson. A servant, a poor man was the best witness for their secret marriage. When they left the church he went to his work and she returned to her house. ' I'll be in the park at five as usual,' she said as she left him."
"So she married him! What shall we do now?" I said.
"First, we'll have something to eat. We are going to be very busy tonight. And I need your help, Watson. It is about 5 now. At 7 we must be there, near her house. Miss Irene returns from her drive at that time and we will meet her."
"And what then?"
"I'll do everything. But, remember, you must not interfere, come what may '. You understand?
"Perhaps something unpleasant will happen. Do not join in it. Then I'll get inside her house. You must wait outside near the sitting room window. Then the sitting room window will open."
"Yes."
"You must watch me."
"Yes."
"When I raise my hand - SO you will throw IT into the room and shout ' Fire!""
I took the small thing out of his hand.
"What is it, Holmes?" I asked.
"Don't be afraid, it's not a bomb, just a smoke - stick.
The room will quickly be full of smoke. Then you walk to the end of the street and wait for me there. Do you understand me?"
"OK, I'll do what you want," I said.

 * Fire! Fire!

That evening Holmes again was wearing different clothes.
He had churchman clothes and a big black hat on. He changed his face, his hair, his manners he was a different man! The stage lost a fine actor, when he became a detective.
At about 6 o'clock we were near Miss Adler ' s house. The street was rather busy. A lot of people were smoking, talking and laughing there.
"You see," said Holmes to me, "the case has become less difficult after their marriage. I don't think Irene wants her husband to see the photo, so it is in a secret place in her house.
Now the question is, ' Where?' I am sure it is in her house."
"But the King's men tried to find it..."
"Yea, but they did not know how to look."
"But how will you look?"
"I will not look. She will show me. She will have to."
Then he suddenly stopped and pointed to the coming cab. One of the men in the street ran up to open the door. Perhaps, he wanted to get some money. Then another man ran up and pushed him away. They started shouting and fighting. Irene was in the middle of the fight. Holmes ran up to help the lady but suddenly he cried and fell to the ground. The blood was running down his face. Irene hurried to her house, but then stopped and looked back.
"How is the poor gentleman?" she asked.
"He is dead," cried some people.
"No, no, he is alive!" cried the others.
"Bring him into the sitting room. There is a comfortable sofa. This way, please!" said Irene.
Some people carried Holmes into the sitting room and put him on the sofa. I could see him through the window. I was watching him with the smoke stick in my hand.
Suddenly Holmes sat up on the sofa. He looked like a man who was in need of air. A servant ran to open the window. At
the same moment Holmes raised his hand and I threw the smoke stick into the room with a cry of "Fire!" The people in the street joined the cry: "Fire!" Thick clouds of smoke filled the room. I walked away to the corner of the street. In ten minutes Holmes came to meet me there.
"You did it very nicely, Doctor," he said.
"You have the photograph?"
"I know where it is. She showed me."
"But why did she show it to you?"
"It is easy," said he, laughing. "You, of course, saw that everyone in the street was helping me. I paid them some money for their help."
Now I could see.
"It wasn't a real fight. It wasn't real blood - just some red paint. It is an old trick. Then I got in her sitting room, asked for some fresh air and you had your chance."
"How did that help you?"
"You see, when a woman thinks that her house is on fire, she runs to the most important things her baby, her gold, her... photo. That's where she ran. The photograph is in a cupboard in her sitting room. I saw the photo. But I couldn't take it because I wasn't alone in the sitting room. I had nothing to do but² say some excuses and leave the house."
"And now?" I asked.
"I must send a telegram to the King right now. Tomorrow we'll come to the house with the King. We will come early when the lady is still in bed. When we are in the sitting room, the King will take the photo with his own hands. Then we will leave the house." That time we were walking along Baker Street. When we stopped near Holmes ' door, a thin young man was passing by.
"Good-night, Mister Sherlock Holmes," he said and hurried away.
"I've heard that voice before," said Holmes looking down the street. "But who was it?"

 * Photo

I slept at Baker Street that night, and we were having our toast and coffee in the morning when the King of Bohemia ran into the room.
"You have really got it!" he cried, happily.
"Not yet."
"But you have hopes?"
"I have hopes."
"Then, come!"
On the way to Irene ' s house Holmes said to the King:
"Irene Adler is married."
"Married! When?"
"Yesterday. Her husband is Mr. Norton, an English lawyer."
"But I hope she doesn't love him."
"I do hope that she does."
"I don't understand why."
"If the lady loves her husband, she does not love Your Majesty. If she does not love Your Majesty, she will not ruin Your Majesty ' s plan."
A servant opened the door and asked:
"Mr. Sherlock Holmes?"
"I am Mr. Holmes," answered my friend. He looked very surprised.
"Mrs. Norton told me that you were going to come. She left this morning with her husband for the Continent."
"What!" Sherlock Holmes cried out. "Do you mean that she has left England?"
"You are right."
"What about the photo? All is lost!" cried the King.
"We shall see," said Holmes and we ran into the sitting room. Holmes opened the cupboard and took out a photo and a letter. The photograph was of Irene Adler herself in evening dress, the letter was addressed to "Sherlock Holmes". My friend opened it and we read it together.
"My Dear Mr. Sherlock Holmes,
You really did it very well. I thought that it was a real fire, and that you were a kind old man. But when I ran up to the cupboard and opened it to take the photo out... I began to think. I remembered those wonderful stories that my friends told me about you, the famous detective in London. I thought it was your trick! You know, I had your address and decided to find everything out myself. I dressed like a young man. I followed you to your door. I wanted to find out if you were Mr. Sherlock Holmes. Then I said ' good-night ' to you outside your door!
"My husband and I decided to leave England. The photo? Please, tell the King I will never show it to anybody. I love my husband and he loves me. Here is a different photo. The King can keep it, if he likes.
Irene Norton"
"What a woman!" cried the King of Bohemia, when we finished reading the letter. "Why didn't I marry her?"
"She is a very clever woman," said Holmes coldly. "I am sorry that I have not finished the case."
"No, no," cried the King. "The photo is safe now. I know that she never breaks her promises. I need nothing more than her word."
"I am glad to hear it."
"How can I thank you, dear Mr. Holmes?"
"Your Majesty, I would like to have just one thing," said Holmes.
"Tell me what it is."
"This photograph!"
The King looked at Holmes in surprise.
" Irene ' s photograph!" he cried. "Certainly, it is yours."
"I thank Your Majesty," Holmes turned away and we left.
And there was no scandal in the kingdom of Bohemia.
Holmes stopped telling jokes about woman's wit '. He always remembers Irene Adler - the woman who was cleverer than he was. And when he speaks of Irene Adler, he says she is the woman.

