Daniel Defoe
Robbinson Crusoe

Chapter 5.
Illness

May 4. - I went fishing, but caught no fish that was good to eat. I dried some of the fish in the sun, and ate them dry. All May I was working hard to make my dwelling comfortable.

June 16-17. - I found a large turtle at the seaside. That was the first time I saw that creature. I spent the whole day cooking the turtle. Its flesh was very delicious.

June 18. - It was raining all day long and it was a bit chilly. It was unusual in that latitude.

June 19. - Maybe because of bad weather and rains I fell ill. I was shivering and had a terrible headache.

June 21. - I was ill, frightened almost to death with my sickness, and that there was no one to help me. I prayed to God for the first time since the storm.

June 26. - I felt better, but very weak. I had nothing to eat. So I took my gun and went hunting. I killed a goat, but got it home with much difficulty.

June 27. - I stayed in bed all day long. I neither ate nor drank anything. I was ready to die for water, but I had no strength to stand up to drink. I prayed to God again, but all I could say was, "Lord, look upon me! Lord, pity me! Lord, have mercy upon me!" After some time, I fell asleep. I woke up at night and found myself much refreshed, but weak and very thirsty. However, as I had no water at home, so I had to wait till morning. Thus, I went to bed and had a terrible dream: I saw a man in a great black cloud and in a bright flame of fire. When he stepped upon the ground, the earth trembled. He spoke to me in a terrible voice. All that I understood was this:  "You haven't learned anything from your life and you are not regretting the things you did, now you shall die." I was so terrified! I thought that it was a punishment for my sin - my rebellious behaviour against my father. Then I cried out, "Lord, be my help, for I need it." That was the first player, if I may call it so, that I had made for many years.

But let's return to my journal.
June 28. - After I slept for a while, I felt better. The first thing I did after getting up was filling a bottle with water and putting up was my bed. I was very weak, but I made a supper from the turtle's eggs. After I had eaten, I tried to walk, but found myself too weak to carry a gun. So, I sat down upon sand looking at the calm and beautiful sea. I was thinking about my father and mother. They loved me so much, but I had left them for my own pleasure. But nothing good worked out of my ideas and dreams to see the world. I disobeyed my parents, and now I was punished. I believed that nothing happens without God's knowledge, so I played again and apologized for my misbehaviour.

June 30. - I was a good day. I killed a seafowl or two. I ate some more of the turtle's eggs, which were very tasty.

July 4. - In the morning, I found the Bible and began to read The New Testament. I read it every morning and every night. That was the first time in all my life that I prayed and began to hope that God would hear me. Now I said the words, "Call on me, and I will glorify thee!" And each day I thanked God for his kindness to me.

From the 4-th of July my health and strength returned and I felt much better. I got back to my everyday routine.

