Daniel Defoe
Robbinson Crusoe

Chapter 1
Start in Life

My name is Robinson Crusoe. I was born in 1632 in the city of York in a good
family. My father was a merchant from Bremen. My mother was from York. I had two
elder brothers, but I don't know much about them. The first was a lieutenant;
he was killed in the battle. What became of my second brother I never knew.

As I was the youngest child in the family. I didn't want to do anything. I liked
to think about the sea, to watch big and beautiful ships and to dream of my own
voyage. My father, a wise and earnest man, wanted me to become a lawyer or
a merchant; but I could think only about going to sea.

He tried to explain me that it was not a good idea to leave the father's house
and native country, where life was calm, easy and pleasant. My father said that
one day I would take charge of his business. He said,
"My son, if you want to have a good live, you have to learn to do something.
You must work hard. I will help and support you. But we, your parents, will
never give a permission to go to see. Only those men sail abroad who do
nothing and just search for adventures. If you disobey us, you will never be
happy."

While he was talking, I observed the tears run down his face. That affected me
much, so I decided to forget about my dreams and to do as he wished.

Time passed but my desire to see the world grew stronger with each day. I couldn't
do any work, I thought about sailing away. I couldn't ask my father for the
permission to go to sea. So, I decided to talk to my mother. I said,
"Dear mum, I promise to work hard, even harder than now, but please, allow me
to go on one voyage abroad; if I don't like it, I will go no more."

But the conversation had no success. With tears in her eyes, she just repeated
father's words. She replied,
"My dear boy, you will be happy if you stay at home; but if you go abroad, you
will find difficult and unfair life there."
I didn't say a word then, but I could not help thinking about a sea trip.

At the age of 18, I was still at home, doing the work I didn't like. Only the
thoughts of sea could improve my mood. Almost a year after, I met my friend in
the harbour where I used to walk. His father had a ship which sailing to London.
So, he suggested going with them.

I said nothing to my parents and on the 1-st of September 1651, I went on board
a ship to London. How glad I was! My dream came true!

Suddenly the wind began to blow and the sea went very high in the most frightful
manner. My father's tears and my mother's words came fresh into my mind. How
could I leave my father's house and abandon my duty?! I felt dizzy. I was seasick.
When the storm was over, I told my friend that I was very frightened. He laughed
at me saying that it hadn't been a strong storm.

We enjoyed sunny weather and clear blue sky for several days. But he happiness
didn't last long. Another, stronger and more frightful storm arose. Everyone on
board thought that the ship would sink. I was dreadfully frightened. The ship
sprung a leak and water poured into it. We got on a small boat, reached the shore
and saw the ship sink. I wanted to go back home, to have a safe and peaceful life.

Later on, I struggled a lot with myself. "How should I live? Should I go back home
or should I go to sea?" For some time, I didn't know what to do until I finally
laid aside the thoughts of returning home and looked out for a new voyage.

