The Stories about Sherlock Holmes

The Adventure of the Beryl Coronet

 1. New Visitor Tells His Story

"Holmes," I said looking out of the window down the road, "here is a madman coming along."
My friend left his armchair and came up to the window. It was a bright cold February morning. The snow was shining brightly in the winter sun. The strange man was coming along the road. He was about fifty years old and was wearing expensive clothes. He was running in a great hurry and his hands were moving up and down. He was shaking his head and making mad faces.
"What on earth is the matter with him?" I asked. "He is looking up at the number of the houses."
"I believe he is coming here, my dear Watson," said Holmes.
"Here?"
"Yes; I think he is coming to consult me professionally. Ha! Did I not tell you?"
As he spoke, the man ran up to our door and rang the bell, making a great noise.
A few minutes later he was in the room. He looked so worried and his face was so white that we were filled with pity. He was out of breath and for some time he could not speak. Sherlock Holmes made him sit down on the chair near the fire.
"Sir, you've come to tell me your story, haven't you?" he said. "You were in a hurry and have tired yourself. Have a rest and then I'll be most happy to look into your problem."
The man sat for a minute looking down, then he turned his face to us.
"You think I am mad, don't you?" he said.
"As far as I can see, you have some great trouble," answered Holmes.
"God knows I have!! The trouble is so sudden and terrible. And it is not I alone. The most noble in the country will have great problems if I cannot find an answer to this terrible problem. You are my last hope, Mr. Holmes."
"Tell me who you are and what your problem is, sir, and I will try to help you," said Holmes.
"My name," answered the visitor, "is Alexander Holder. I am the head of the Bank of Holder and Stevenson in London."
The name was well known and we waited for an unusual story.
"I feel that there is no time to lose and that's why I was in a hurry on the way here. The police inspector advised me to come to you. Now when I feel better, I'm going to tell you my story as short and clear as I can.
"Yesterday morning I was sitting in my office. A bank officer came to say that a visitor wanted to see me. I was surprised
to hear the visitor ' s name: it was a very famous one, known all over the world one of the highest and most noble names in England. When he came in I understood that he was in a hurry, and rather worried.
' Mr. Holder!' he said. ' I know that you often lend money to people. It is most important to have fifty thousand pounds at once."
' Can you leave with me something of value to keep until you bring the money back?' I said.
' Yes. Perhaps you have heard of the Beryl Coronet?'
' One of the most expensive things in the country? Certainly I have.'
"The visitor opened his case. Inside there lay the most beautiful piece of jewellery.
' There are thirty-nine large beryls,' he said. ' Its price is... I think it is twice more. So I will leave it with you.'
"I took the coronet in my hands and looked at the man.
' Ah, you think it is not mine. Well, I would certainly not do so if I were not sure that I shall be able to ask you for it in four days' time, when I am able to repay you the money. All I ask is that it be secret, and that you take care of the crown.
There will be great trouble if anything wrong happens to it.'
"I called for his bank officer and ordered him to pay out fifty thousand pounds to the visitor. When this visitor left the bank, I looked at the coronet and thought: ' Why did I agree to keep it?' But it was too late to change anything, so I locked it up in my safe. When the evening came I decided that it was not clever to leave it at the bank. ' I'll carry the  coronet in the case with me for the next few days, I thought. So I went home, carrying the Beryl Coronet in the case. When I came home I took it upstairs and locked it in the desk of my dressing room.
"You know, Mr. Holmes, I am not a married man but in my house I have my son Arthur and a young girl Mary my
niece. There are two servants, who don't sleep in the house, and three women servants who I believe absolutely. My son is the only trouble maker. People tell me I have spoiled him '. When my wife died he was all I had to love.
"Arthur doesn't want to work in the bank. He has an easy life with his rich friends. He enjoys parties and horses and playing cards. His friends are rich, and so he spends more money than I give him.
"Sir George Burnwell is one of his friends and he often comes to our house. He is much older than Arthur, one who has been everywhere and seen everything. He is a brilliant talker, and a man of great personal beauty. But I don't trust him.
"Mary is the daughter of my brother who died five years ago. She is sweet, loving and beautiful, and as quiet and gentle as a woman should be. I don't know what I would do without her. Twice Arthur asked her to marry him, but twice she said ' no ' to him.
"Now, Mr. Holmes, you know the people who live under my roof, and I shall go on with my story.
"When we were having coffee that night after dinner, I told Arthur and Mary about the Beryl Coronet. ' What a day I've had! I have to look after it until next week. It's too expensive to leave at the bank, so I must keep it with me for a few days.' ' Where have you put it?" asked Arthur. ' In my dressing room upstairs, it is locked in the desk.' ' Well, I hope thieves won't get inside our house at night,' said Arthur. ' Oh, any old key will open it. When I was young, I often opened it myself.' When our dinner was over, Arthur followed me into my room.
' Look, father,' he said, ' can you let me have two hundred pounds?'
' No, I can't,' I answered angrily.
' You have been very kind,' said Arthur, ' but I must have the money, or I won't be able to meet my friends again.'
' I hope you will not!'
' All right, but you don't want me to bring shame on your name. I must have the money, and if you won't give it to me, I'll try to find it.'
"I was very angry because it was the third time during the month. Arthur left the room and I opened the desk, saw that the coronet was safe and closed it again. Then I started to go round the house and make sure that every door and every window was closed. Downstairs I saw Mary. She was standing near the window. When I came up to her she quickly closed and locked it.
' Tell me, dad,' said she, looking a little worried, ' did you let Lucy go out tonight?"
' Certainly not.'
' She came in just now by the back door. I am sure that she has been out to see someone, but I think that it is hardly safe and should be stopped.'
' You must speak to her in the morning, or I will. Are you sure that everything is locked?"
' Quite sure, dad.'
' Then, good-night.' I kissed her and went up to my bedroom again, where I was soon asleep."

 2. Arthur! The Thief!

"I am not a heavy sleeper and about two o'clock in the morning I woke up. I was listening with all my ears. Suddenly I heard a small noise, there were footsteps about in the sitting room. Quietly I got up and went there.
' Arthur! You thief. How can you touch the crown!' My unhappy son was dressed only in shirt and trousers. He had the coronet in his hands. When he heard my words, he dropped the coronet and his face turned white.
' You have destroyed it! You have brought shame on me forever! Where are the beryls you have stolen?'
' Stolen!' cried Arthur.
' Yes, you thief! My own son is a thief!"
' But there is nothing missing ', beryls cannot be missing."
' There are three missing. And you know where they are. You are a liar as well as a thief! I saw it with my own eyes.'
' You have called me enough bad names. I won't say another word. I'll leave your house in the morning and you will never see me again.'
' You will get in the hands of the police!'
"At that time everyone in the house woke up. Mary was the first to run into the room, and when she saw the crown and Arthur, she went white and fell on the floor. I sent for the police. When they arrived, Arthur asked me if I wanted to ask the police to take him away. But I explained him that the Beryl Coronet belonged to the country.
of us ' Let me leave the house for five minutes. It will help both please believe me.'
' Then you will run away, or hide what you have stolen. Tell me what you have done with the beryls and I can save you from the shame. I have caught you with the coronet.'
"But all I could do then was to let the police take my son away. The police spent a lot of time looking for stolen beryls but they found nothing. They were puzzled, and did not know what to do.
' My advice to you, sir,' said the officer, ' is to go to Mr. Sherlock Holmes, who lives in Baker Street. He is a great detective, and this is the sort of case he has often helped the police with.'
"You can ask for as much money as you like. My God, what shall I do! I have lost my honour and my son in one night! Oh, what shall I do!"

 3. Holmes Asks Questions

Sherlock Holmes sat silent for some minutes watching the fire.
"Do many friends come to your house?" Holmes asked.
"Very few. They are my partner with his family and a friend of my son Arthur, Sir George Burnwell. No one else, I think."
"Well, do you often go out?"
"Arthur does. Mary and I always stay at home."
"That is not usual for a young girl."
"She is a quiet girl. Not so very young. She is twenty-four."
"That night was a shock to her, wasn't it?"
"Terrible! I think she feels worse than I do."
"Then you are both sure that your son has stolen the beryls?"
"I saw him myself, with the coronet in his hands."
"God bless you! You are trying hard to help him, and me. But it is too difficult. What was he doing there? And why didn't he make up a lie? What did the police think about the noise that woke you?"
"They thought it was the noise of the Arthur ' s closing door."
"I don't think so. A thief never makes a noise loud enough to wake up all the people in the house. The beryls the police doing about them?" what are
"They are looking everywhere under the floors - in the furniture hoping to find them in the house."
"Have they thought of looking outside the house?"
"Yes. In the garden."
"Now, my dear sir," said Holmes, "don't you see that this case is not so simple as you and the police think? You think
that your son came down from his bed, went to your dressing room, found the coronet, broke off a piece of it, then went somewhere to hide this piece so cleverly indeed that no one can find it and then returned to the room. Do you really believe it? I'd like to go with you to your house, and see everything with my own eyes."
Holmes asked me to go with them. I followed them with great pleasure because I wanted to see Holmes at work. When I was listening to Mr. Holder, I believed that Arthur had stolen the beryls. But deep in my heart I trusted Sherlock Holmes, and I was sure there was some hope for the boy, and another explanation for the missing beryls.
Mr. Holder was glad to have that small hope too.

 4. Holmes Gets Answers

The house where Mr. Holder lived was made of white stone and rather big. A wide road led to the house, and on the right side there was a small path, leading from the road to the kitchen door. The other small path led to the stables. It was winter and white deep snow covered the big garden.
Holmes walked slowly all round the house again and again, and then he went down the small kitchen path, and through the garden to the back of the house. He walked so long that Mr. Holder and I went into the dining room and waited for him by the fire. We were sitting there in silence when the door opened and a young lady came in. She was not very tall, slim, with dark hair and dark eyes. I don't think I have ever seen such a pale white face. Her lips were colourless too and her eyes were red with crying. She didn't look at me but came up to her uncle.
"Have you told them to free Arthur, dad?"
"No, no, Mary. The police..."
"But I'm sure he has done nothing. I know it, and I know you'll be sorry for it."
"Why is he silent, then, if he didn't steal the beryls?"
"Who knows?"
"But I saw him with the coronet in his hand!"
"Oh, but perhaps he just wanted to look at it. It is so terrible to think of our dear Arthur in prison."
"Not until they find the beryls. I have brought a gentleman from London to look more deeply into the case."
"This gentleman?" she asked, looking at me.
"No. His friend. He wanted us to leave him alone. He is in the stable lane ' now."
"What can he hope to find there? Ah! This, I think, is he. I believe, sir, that you will be able to prove that Arthur hasn't done anything."
"I agree with you, young lady and I think that we can prove it. I believe you must be Miss Mary Holder. May I ask you one or two questions?"
"Please do, sir, if it may be of any help."
"You heard nothing yourself last night?"
"Nothing, until my uncle here began to speak loudly. I heard that and came down."
"You locked the windows and doors the night before. Did you lock all the windows?"
"Yes."
"Were they all locked in the morning?"
"Yes."
"You have a girl servant who has a sweet - heart? I think that you told your uncle last night that she went to see him?"
"Yes, and she was the girl who waited in the drawing - room and who could hear uncle's story about the coronet."
"I see. You think that perhaps she went out to tell her sweet heart, and that the two had a plan."
"But what is the good of all these theories," cried the banker, "when I told you that I saw Arthur with the coronet in his hands?"
"Wait a little, Mr. Holder. We must come back to that. About this girl, Miss Holder. You saw her return by the kitchen door?"
"Yes; when I went to see if the door was locked for the night I saw her. I saw the man, too."
"Do you know him?"
"Oh, yes! he is the green grocer who brings our vegetables. His name is Francis Prosper."
"He stood," said Holmes, "to the left of the door up the path."
"Yes, he did."
"And he is a man with a wooden leg?"
They saw something like fear in the young lady's expressive black eyes. "Why, you are like a magician," said she. "How do you know that?" She smiled, but there was no answering smile in Holmes ' s thin face and he said:
"I would like to go upstairs, then to go over the outside of the house again. But first I'll take a look at the windows on the ground floor."
Holmes walked quickly from window to window. He opened the large one which looked from the hall to the stable lane. He was watching outside.
"Now let's go upstairs," he said at last.
In the banker ' s sitting room, he came up to the case where the crown was. He studied the lock. He opened the case and took out the coronet. It was bent and one corner was missing.
"Now, Mr Holder," said Holmes, "will you try to break off the other corner of the coronet?"
The banker looked very surprised.
"I won't try," he said.
"Then I will." Holmes suddenly tried to break the coronet, but with no result.
"I feel it move a little," he said, "but I can't break it. I don't think anyone could."
"I don't know what to think. It is all dark to me '," said Holder.
"Your son had no shoes on when you saw him?"
"He had his trousers and a shirt."
"Thank you. Well, I think, now I'll go outside. Stay here because some extra footprints will make the task more difficult."
When Sherlock Holmes came back, about an hour later, his feet were white with snow, but he had nothing much to say.
"I think I have seen now all that there is to see, Mr. Holder. I'm going home now."
"But the beryls, Mr. Holmes. Where are they?"
"I cannot tell."
The banker looked very unhappy.
"I shall never see them again!" he cried. "And my son? Can you give me any hope?"
"I think he hasn't done anything."
"Then what happened in my house last night?"
"If you come to me tomorrow morning I'll be happy to do what I can to help you. Are you ready to spend a large sum of money?"
"Anything to get the beryls back!"
I was sure that Holmes knew the answer to all Holder ' s questions but what it was that was a mystery to me. On our way home I tried to get the answer but Holmes was quiet and didn't say a word. When we were back home, he hurried to his room and was down again in a few minutes dressed like a beggar wearing old dirty clothes.
I was having my tea when he came back. He looked very pleased.
"I haven't finished yet. I'm going out again in a minute."
"Where to?"
"Oh, the other side of London. I'll be back late, so don't wait up for me."
"How are you getting on? Are you having any luck?" I asked.
"Oh, so - so. I have been to Holder ' s house. Now I must change back to my own clothes." And off he went again dressed in his usual way.
I waited for him up to the midnight and then I went to my room. In the morning when I came down for breakfast in the morning, there he was with a cup of coffee in one hand and a newspaper in the other. He was quite fresh and pleased.

 5. The missing Beryls

In a minute Mr. Holder came into the room. I was shocked by the change, which had come over him. He looked very ill and tired out.
"I don't know what I have done to be so tired," he said. "Only two days ago I was a happy man without a trouble in the world. Now I am alone. My son is a thief and he is in prison and my niece Mary has left me too."
"Left you?"
"Yes. Her room was empty in the morning, and there was a letter for me on the hall table"
He gave the letter to Holmes and he read:
My dearest uncle:
I feel that I have brought trouble on you. Why did I not act differently? I can't, with this thought in my mind, stay in your  house, so I must leave you forever. Don't worry about me. I can look after myself. Please don't look for me. In life or death I am your loving,
Mary
"What can she mean?" asked Holder.
"I don't know, sir, but I think it is very good that she has gone. Soon your troubles will end."
"Have you heard something, Mr. Holmes? You have learned something! Where are the beryls?"
"Are you ready to pay one thousand pounds for each of them?" Holmes asked quietly.
"I've got ten thousand with me."
"No. Three thousand will do, and I would like the money now."
When Holmes got the money, he came up to his desk and took out a little piece of gold with three beryls in it, and put it in front of Holder.
"You have it!" he cried. "I am saved! I am saved! Then it was not Arthur who took them? Then let us hurry to him at once, and let him know the truth."
"He knows it. I have told him. He didn't want to tell me, so I told him what had happened."
"What is this mystery, then?"
"First of all, I must tell you something that will hurt you very much. Your Mary and Sir George Burnwell have run away together."
"My Mary? Impossible!"
"It is true. You and your son did not know the true character of the man. He is one of the most dangerous men in England - a man without heart. Mary knew nothing of such men. She believed him when he told her that he loved her. The devil knows what he told her but she followed all his orders. They met every evening."
"I cannot believe you, I will not believe it!" cried the banker. His face was pale.
"I will tell you what happened in your house that night. When you went to bed, Mary came to the hall. She opened the big window and talked to Sir George Burnwell, who was outside. I saw his deep foot marks in the snow, and I am sure he was there for a long time. She told him about the coronet. He orders her to steal the coronet. Your son Arthur didn't sleep well that night, because of his quarrel with you. Then, in the middle of the night, he heard someone go quietly in the corridor. He looked out and saw Mary going into your dressing room. He waited in the dark watching.
"When Mary came out of the room with the coronet in her hands, he could hardly believe his eyes. He followed her quietly. She went downstairs, opened the window, and gave the coronet to someone outside. Then she closed the window and ran back to her room. At that moment your son was hiding behind the curtain.
"He loved Mary and he could do no harm to her. But when she left, he opened the window and jumped into the snow, where he could see a figure of a man in the moonlight. It was Sir George Burnwell. He tried to get away but Arthur caught him and there was a fight between them. Suddenly the coronet broke, and Arthur had it in his hands. He ran back, closed the window and went to your dressing room. He was going to put the coronet back into your desk when you found him there."
"Is it possible?" asked Mr. Holder.
"You made him angry. You called him bad names, when he saved the coronet, and he decided not to tell you the truth."
"So that was why Mary went white and fell down on the floor when she saw the coronet! What a fool I am! When Arthur asked to go out into the garden for five minutes, he wanted to go and find the missing piece of it."
Holmes said, "When I arrived at the house, I at once went into the garden, I watched the footprints in the snow. I saw Arthur ' s foot marks without shoes on. I saw the place where they
had a fight, so I knew I was right. Sir George Burnwell's foot marks went to the end of the lane."
"But how did you find out that it was Sir George?"
"You told me that you did not have many visitors in your house. I remembered only Sir George. I knew his name. I knew enough of him so at night I went to his house as a beggar, and asked his servant for some old clothes. What luck! He gave me some shoes (they were wet) and told me that his master had thrown them out that day. Then I took the shoes to your house and found they were the same size as the foot marks in the snow."
"I saw a beggar in my garden yesterday evening," said Mr. Holder.
"It was me. I found that I had my man. So I came home and changed my clothes. Now, I had to get the beryls back from him! At first he didn't want to listen to me. But when he saw that I knew everything, he took up a heavy stick and wanted to have a fight with me. I pointed my pistol at him and told that I could give him a lot of money for the beryls. That's how I got them back!
"Then I visited your son in the prison, and at last got to bed at two o'clock in the morning. A really hard day's work!"
"A day which has saved England from a great public shame," said the banker, and he rose from his chair. "Sir, I can't find the words to thank you. You are a greater detective than people have told me. I must go at once to my dear son. As for Mary, it goes to my very heart, but even you cannot tell me where she is now."
"I think that we may say," said Holmes, "that she is with Sir George Burnwell. And that, poor girl, is her punishment."

