Geometry is the branch of mathematics that is the study of:
    -   shapes;
    -   lines;
    -   angles;
    -   space;
    -   relationship between them.

Point - indicates a location, name by A
Line  - s straight path extending infinitely in opposite directions, name by AB or a
Line segment - part of a line with two endpoints, by AB.
Ray   - part of a line that starts at a point and extends infinitely in one direction, named AB
Vertex - the point of intersection of two or more line segments, rays, or lines, named A.
Angle - formed by two rays with the some endpoint the vertex, named ∠A or ∠BAC
Triangle - shape with three sides and three vertices, named ⊿A
Parallel lines - lines that are always the same distance apart. They never meet, written as l || m.
Perpendicular lines - lines that intersect to form four right angles.

A line is straight, has no width, and extends infinitely in opposite directions.
It is one dimensional, or flat.
Collinear (sharing line) points lie on the same line.

Plane geometry deals with flat shapes such as squares and triangles.
Flat shapes are two dimensional.
Named by three capital letter on the plane, e.g. PSQ
Coplanar (sharing plane) points lie on the same plane.

Two lines intersect at a point.
Two planes intersect along a line.
A plane and a line intersect at a point.

Postulate is a statement that is accepted as fact, without proof.
A theorem is a statement that has been proven to be true using other theorems,
definitions, or postulates.

Segment addition postulate: If B is a point on line segment AC, then AB + BC = AC

Two line segments are congruent if they have the same length.
To show this the same number of tick marks are used.

The midpoint of a line segments is the halfway, it divides the line segment into
two congruent segments.

Bisect means to divide into two equal parts.
A segment bisector in a line, ray, segment, of plane that passes through a segment
at its midpoint (bisects it).

An angle ∠A is formed by two rays with a common endpoint (vertex).

The space around an angle can be classified as interior or exterior.

The measure of ∠A (the size of the angle) is written as m∠A.
We use degrees (*) to measure the size of an angle. There are 360* in a circle.

Right angle     : 90*
Acute angle     : (0-90)*
Obtuse angle    : (90-180)*
Straight angle  : 180*

Adjacent angles that lie in the same plane, have a common (the same) vertex,
share a common side, and have no common interior points.

Angle addition postulate: If point R is in the interior of ∠QPS, then
                        m∠QPR + m∠RPS = m∠QPS

Two angles are congruent if their angle measures are equal.

Vertical angles are nonadjacent and opposite each other. They are formed when
two lines intersect. They share the same vertex.
Vertical angles are congruent.

Complementary angles have sum is 90*.
Supplementary angles have sum is 180*.
Linear pair - that a adjacent and supplementary.

An angle bisector is a ray that divides an angle into two congruent angles.

Perpendicular lines, rays, or segments form right angles (90*).

A perpendicular bisector is a line, ray, or line segment that divides a line
segment into two congruent segments and forms four right angles with it.

Inductive reasoning is used to form hypotheses (explanations) based on a set of
observations. The explanation or conclusion, is called a conjecture.

Observation -> conjecture

A counterexample is an exception to the observation.
It shows that a statement is false.

Conditional statements are statements that have the form if then.
Its are either true or false.

To prove that a conditional statement is true, you must show that the conclusion
occurs for all cases.
To show that a conditional statement is false, present a counterexample that shows
the statement is not true.

If p then q
    p - hypothesis
    q - conclusion
    p -> q

The converse of a conditional statement if formed by switching the hypothesis and
the conclusion.
    if p then q, converse is if q then p.

The converse of a true condition statement is not always true.

In a biconditional statement is true and its converse is true.
    p <-> q = iff if and only if

Deductive reasoning uses given facts and statements to reach a conclusion logically.

Law of deductive reasoning:
    - law of detachment
    - law of syllogism

Law of detachment: if p -> q and p are true then q is true.
Law of syllogism : if p -> q and q ->r are both true, then the statement p -> r is also true.

A proof, or logical argument, can be used to show why a conjecture is true.

Transitive property of congruence: if AB = CD and CD = EF then AB = EF

Flowchart proof is a diagram that uses boxes and arrows to show the logical
order of each statement leading to a conclusion.

A paragraph proof (or informal proof) explains why a conjecture is true in paragraph
form.

Parallel lines are lines on the same plane that never meet (intersect). l || m

Skew lines are two lines, on different planes, that never meet.

Parallel planes are two planes that never intersect.

A transversal is a line that intersects two or more lines.
Interior angles are all the angles between the lines intersected by the transversal.
Exterior angles are all the angles that are not between the lines intersected by the transversal.

Alternate interior angles are interior angles on opposite sides of the transversal.
Same side interior angles are interior angles on the same side of the transversal.
Alternate exterior angles are exterior angles on opposite sides of the transversal.
Corresponding angles are in the same relative position on each line on the same
side of the transversal.

Corresponding angles postulate: If two parallel lines are cut by a transversal, their
corresponding angles are congruent.

Alternate interior angles theorem: If two parallel lines are cut by a transversal,
then their alternate interior angles a congruent.

Alternate exterior angles theorem: If two parallel lines are cut by a transversal,
then their alternate exterior angles a congruent.

Same side interior angles theorem: When two parallel lines are intersected by
a transversal then their same side interior angles are supplementary.
            m∠1 = m∠2 = 180*

Converse of corresponding angles postulate: if corresponding angles are congruent,
then the lines are parallel.

Converse of alternate interior angles theorem: If alternate interior angles are
congruent, then the lines are parallel.
... converse of
    -   same side interior angles theorem
    -   alternate exterior angles theorem

A polygon is a two dimensional (flat) closed figure with at least three straight sides.

A triangle is a polygon with three sides and three angles.

Triangles:
    - equilateral
    - isosceles
    - scalene

    - acute
    - obtuse
    - right

If a triangle is equilateral, then all angles are equal.
If all angles of triangle are equal, then it is equilateral.

In an isosceles triangle, the sides that are equal in length are called the legs.
The third side is called the base. The angles opposite the legs are called the base angles.

Isosceles triangle theorem: If two sides of a triangle are congruent, then
the angles opposite those sides are congruent.
... converse of isosceles triangle theorem.

The angles inside a triangle are the interior angles.

Triangle angle sum theorem: The sum of the measures of the three interior angles is 180*.

The measurement of an exterior angle is equal to the sum of the two nonadjacent
interior angles.

Congruent polygons have the same shape and size.

Side side side (sss) congruence postulate: If the three sides of one triangle are
congruent to the three sides of another triangle, then the triangles are congruent.

Side angle side (sas) congruence postulate: If two sides and the included angle of
one triangle are congruent to two sides and the included angle of another, then
the triangles are congruent.

Included angle - the angle between two sides of a triangle.

Angle side angle (ASA) congruence postulate: If two angles and the included side
of one triangle are congruent to two angles and the included side of another triangle,
then the triangles are congruent.

Included side - the side between two angles of a triangle.

Angle Angle side congruence theorem: If tow angles and a nonincluded side of one
triangle are congruent to two angles and the corresponding nonincluded side of
another triangle, then the triangles are congruent.

Hypotenuse leg (HL) theorem: If the hypotenuse and a leg of one right triangle are
congruent to the hypotenuse and a leg another right triangle, then the triangles
are congruent.

Perpendicular bisectors always cross a line segment at right angles, cutting it
into two equal parts.

If a point is on the perpendicular bisector of a line segment, then the point is
equidistant to the segments endpoints. And converse of the theorem.

When three or more lines intersect at one point, they a concurrent.
Their point of intersection is called the point of concurrency.

In a triangle, there are three perpendicular bisectors that all meet at one
point, the circumcenter. It can be outside or inside the triangle.

Circumcenter theorem: The circumcenter of a triangle is equidistant to the vertices.

In a triangle, the angle bisectors of the three interior angles all meet at one point.
This point is at the center of the triangle and is called incenter.

Incenter theorem: The incenter is equidistant to the sides of the triangle.

A median of the triangle is a line from a vertex to the midpoint of the opposite side.

Every triangle has three medians which meet at a point called the centroid.

Centroid theorem: The centroid is 2/3 of the distance from each vertex to the midpoint
of the opposite side.

Centroid is called the center of gravity - the point where the weight is equally balanced.

The altitude of a triangle is the line segment from a vertex to the opposite side,
and perpendicular to that side. It can be outside or inside.

The point where the altitudes meet is the orthocenter. It can be outside or inside.

When comparing two sides of a triangle, the angle opposite the longer side is larger
than opposite the shorter side.

When comparing two angles of a triangle, the side opposite the large angle is larger
angle is longer than the side opposite the smaller angle.

Triangle inequality theorem: The sum of the lengths of any two sides in a triangle
is greater than the length of the third side. In other words, add the length of
two sides. That sum will be greater than the length of the third side.

A quadrilateral is a shape with four sides.
Quadri = 4
Lateral = sides


Quadrilaterals:
    - parallelogram - opposite sides are parallel and equal in length.
    - rectangle     - A parallelogram where all four sides form right angles.
    - rhombus       - a parallelogram where all sides are equal in length.
    - square        - a parallelogram where all sides are equal in length and all sides forms right angles.
    - trapezoid     - Has exactly two parallel sides. Sides do not have to be equal in length.

Parallelograms have the following properties:
    - congruent opposite sides
    - congruent opposite angles
    - consecutive angles that are supplementary
    - diagonal bisect each other
    - each diagonal divides the parallelogram into two congruent triangles

It's a parallelogram if:
    - both pairs of opposite sides are congruent
    - both paris of opposite angles are congruent
    - an angle it supplementary to both of its consecutive angles.
    - has diagonals that bisect each other.
    - has one pair of sides that is both congruent and parallel

Rhombuses have diagonals that are perpendicular.
Each diagonal in a rhombus bisects a pair of opposite angles.

A parallelogram is a rhombus if has:
    - perpendicular diagonals
    - one diagonal that bisects a pair of opposite angles
    - one pair of consecutive congruent sides.

A rectangle is a parallelogram with four right angles.

A parallelogram is a rectangle if:
    - its diagonals are congruent

A square is a parallelogram with four right angles and four congruent sides.
A square is both a rectangle and a rhombus.

Trapezoids and kites are quadrilaterals that are not parallelograms.

Trapezoids is a quadrilateral with exactly one pair of parallel sides.
The parallel sides are called bases, and the nonparallel sides are called legs.
The angles adjacent to a base are called base angles.

The midsegment of a trapezoid is a line segment that bisects both legs.
The midsegment of a trapezoid is parallel to the bases.
Its length is found by averaging the lengths of the two bases (adding up the
lengths of the two bases and dividing by two).

Isosceles trapezoids has congruent legs.
It has two pairs of congruent base angles.
A trapezoid is isosceles if and only if its diagonals are congruent.

Kite is a quadrilateral with two pair of adjacent congruent sides.
Kite is a quadrilateral if:
    - its diagonals are perpendicular
    - at least one pair of opposite angles are congruent

Polygon in closed plane figure with at least three straight side.
Polygons are named by the number of sides they have:    
    - 3 triangle
    - 4 quadrilateral
    - 5 pentagon
    - 6 hexagon
    - 7 heptagon
    - 8 octagon
    - 9 nonagon
    -10 decagon

The interior angles of
    - angle             add up 180*
    - quadrilateral     add up 360*
    - n side polygon    add up (n-2)x180*

The exterior angle is the angle between the side of a polygon and a line extended
from the next side.
The sum of the exterior angles always stays the same, no matter how many sides the polygon has.
And add up to 360*

A regular polygon has all congruent angles and all congruent sides.

Figures on a coordinate plane can be moved in any direction, which results in
new figures and new positions.
The action of moving a figure is called a transformation.

In a transformation, the original figure is called the preimage,
and the new figure is called the image.

If the shape and the size of a figure remain the same in a transformation,
the movement is called a rigid motion or congruence transformation.

There are three types of rigid motions:
    - reflections
    - translations
    - rotations

A reflection is a type of transformation that flips an image over a line, so that
the image appears backward like in a mirror.

ABC -> A'B'C'  the mark ' is called prime
Line l is the line of reflection. Figure is reflected across line l.

The line of reflection is the perpendicular bisector of the line segment that
connects the corresponding points of the image and preimage.

A translation is a type of rigid motion that slides a figure a certain distance
to the left or right, up or down, or both horizontally and vertically.

Translations can be defined using a translation vector, which states how many
units each point in the graph moves in the translation.

Rotations are transformations that turn a figure around a fixed point.
Rotations are rigid motions. The shape, size, and measures of angles of the
figure stay the same, but the orientation changes.
Center of rotation - the point around which a figure is turned. It can be
outside or inside the figure.
Angle of rotation - the number of degrees each point on the figure is turned.
Rotation can be clockwise (turns right) or counterclockwise (turns left).

Compositions of transformations combine two or more transformations to form a
new transformation.

Glide reflection is a translation followed by a reflection.

If a figure is reflected across a line and the new figure in unchanged, then
the figure has line symmetry.
A line of symmetry divides a figure into two mirror images.

Two figures are congruent if there is a sequence of rigid motions that maps one
figure directly onto the other.

Ratio is a comparison of two or more quantities. a/b
Extended ratio compares more than two quantities. a/b/c

A proportion is an equation where two rations are equal.
a/b = c/d or ad = bc

A dilation is a transformation that is not a rigid motion.
Dilations change the size of a figure. The shape remains the same.

Dilation:
    - enlargement or magnification
    - reduction

Scale factor (r) a ratio that determines how much bigger or smaller the image is
compared to the preimage.

Dilations have a center, O, which is a fixed point.
All the points expand or shrink from the center by a scale factor.

Two figures are similar if they have the same shape but not necessarily the same size.

Two polygons are similar if all corresponding angles are congruent and all
corresponding side lengths are proportional.
    ~ the symbol for similarity.

The scale factor of two similar polygons is the ratio of the lengths of the
corresponding sides.

Angle Angle (AA) similarity postulate: If two angles of one triangle are congruent
to two angles of another triangle, then those two triangles are similar.

Side angle side (SAS) similarity theorem: If two corresponding sides of two
triangles are proportional and the included angles of those sides are congruent,
then the triangles are similar.

Side side side (SSS) similarity theorem: If the corresponding sides of two
triangles are proportional, then the triangles are similar.

Triangle proportionality theorem: If a line is parallel to one side of a triangle
and it intersects the other sides, then it divides the two sides proportionally.

A corollary is a statement that follows from a theorem or postulate and requires
little or no proof.

Corollary to the triangle proportionality theorem: If three or more parallel lines
intersect two transversals, then they divide the transversals proportionally.

Angle bisector theorem: If AD is a bisector ∠A then c/m = b/n.
(AD divides opposite side on m and b).
And converse is true.

Slope (m) is ratio that describes that tilt of a line: slope (m) = rise/run
Rise is how much a line goes up or down.
Run is how much a line moves left or right.

    m = (y2 - y1)/(x2 - x1)

Perpendicular lines have slopes that are the negative reciprocals of each other.

A reciprocal is a fraction where the numerator and denominator are reversed.

Linear equation: y = mx + b
m - slope, b - intercept with y axis, point (0, b)

A right triangle has two legs and a hypotenuse - the side opposite the right angle.
The legs are connected at the right angle. The lengths of the legs are a and b
and c is hypotenuse.

Pythagorean theorem: In a right triangle, the sum of the squares of the lengths
of the legs is equal to the square of the hypotenuse: a^2 + b^2 = c^2

If c^2 < a^2 + b^2 - an acute triangle, otherwise an obtuse.

The midpoint is the point on a line segment that is halfway between endpoints.
                    midpoint = (a + b)/2

        AB = √(x2 - x1)^2 + (y2 - y1)

Trigonometry is used to find measures in triangles.
Trigonometry is the study of the relationship between side lengths and angles in triangles.

trigonon = triangle
metron   = measure

Opposite the leg that is opposite angle Q.
Adjacent the leg that is next to angle Q.

The trigonometric functions sine (sin), cosine (cos), and tangent (tan) are each
a ratio of sides of a right triangle. They used to find unknown angle measures or
side lengths of a right triangle.

    sin(Q) = opposite/hypotenuse
    cos(Q) = adjacent/hypotenuse
    tan(Q) = opposite/adjacent

If Q = 45*, then hypotenuse = leg x √2

Law of sines: sin(A)/a = sin(B)/b = sin(C)/c,
where ∠A, ∠B, ∠C are opposite a, b, and c.

Law of cosines: c^2 = a^2 + b^2 - 2ab cos(C)

A circle is the set of all points on a plane that are an equal distance from
a point called the center.

Circumference (C) - the distance around the circle (the perimeter).

Chord - a line segment whose endpoints are on the circle.

Diameter (d) - a chord that passes through the center of the circle.
Radius (r) - the line segment that has one endpoint on the center and the other
on the circle. r = (1/2)d

Pi (п) - the ratio of a circle circumference to its diameter: п = С/d.
        C = пd = 2пd

Concentric circles are circles with the same center.

A central angle is an angle that has its vertex on the center of a circle.
The segments forming the central angle are radii of the circle.

An arc is a part of the circumference.
A sector is a slice of the circle.

The measure of an arc is equal to the measure of its center angle.

An arc that is 180* is a semicircle.
Minor arc is smaller than semicircle.
Major arc is larger than semicircle.

Arc addition postulate: the sum of two adjacent arcs equals the total arc.

Arc length is the length of an arc (the distance from endpoint to endpoint).
Arc length is a fraction of the circumference.
    l = (x/360) 2пr

Another way to measure angles is using radians (rad).
One radian is the measure of a center angle that has an arc length that is equal
to the radius:  1 radian = 180/п.

A chord divides a circle into major and minor arcs.
The minor arc is called the arc of the chord.

Theorems about chords: In a circle or in congruent circles, congruent chords
have congruent arcs.
In a circle or in congruent circles, congruent chords are equidistant from the center.
If a diameter is perpendicular to a chord, then it bisects the chord and its arc.
The perpendicular bisector of a chord is a diameter.

An inscribed angle is formed by two intersecting chords with a vertex on the circle.
The intercepted arc is the part of the circle that is in the interior of the inscribed angle.

The measure of an inscribed angle is half the measure of its intercepted arc:
        m∠A = (1/2)mBC

If two inscribed angles have the same intercepted arc, then those angles are congruent.

An angle inscribed in a semicircle is a right angle.

An inscribed shape is inside another shape, just touching the sides.

If a quadrilateral is inscribed in a circle, then its opposite angles are supplementary.

A tangent is a line, segment, or ray that intersects a circle in exactly one point
(called the point of tangency).

A line is tangent to a circle if and only if it is perpendicular to the radius
drawn to the point of tangency.

Tangent segments from the same point outside a circle are congruent.

A secant is a line that intersects a circle at two points.

When two secants intersect inside a circle: The measure of the angle that is
formed is equal to one half the sum of the intercepted arcs:
    1 = (1/2)(x + y)
When two secants intersect outside a circle: The measure of the angle that is
formed to one half the different of the far arc less the near arc:
    1 = (1/2)(x - y)

Circle equation:    x^2 + y^2 = r^2

For any point (x, y) on the circle works pythagorean theorem
The circle is the shape formed by all (x, y) points where x^2 + y^2 = r^2 is true.

(x - h)^2 + (y - k)^2 = r^2, if center is (h, k)

Area (A) is the amount of space inside a two dimensional object.

The area of a parallelogram is the length of the base times the height.
        A = bh

Area of triangles:  A = (1/2)bh

Area of trapezoid: A = (1/2)h(b1 + b2)

Area of rhombus: A = (1/2)d1d2, d - diagonals

Areas of regular polygons:  A = (1/2) a P

a - apothen (perpendicular distance from the center to a side)
P - perimeter

Area of circle:  A = п r^2

Area of a sector: A = (Q/360*) п r^2

A polyhedron is a 3D figure made up of polygons.
The polygon flat surfaces are called faces.
The line segments where the faces meet are called edges.
The vertices (plural of vertex) are points where three or more edges meet (the corners).

Prisms are a type of polyhedron made up of two polygon faces that are parallel and
congruent, called bases. The remaining faces are called the lateral faces,
which are parallelograms.

The surface area of a polyhedron is the sum of the area of its faces.

Lateral area is the total area of the lateral faces.

Area of a cylinder:  A = 2 п r^2 + 2 п r h

A pyramid is a polyhedron in which the base is a polygon and the lateral faces
are triangles. The faces meet at one point called the vertex or apex.

A regular pyramid has congruent lateral faces and a regular polygon for its base.

The slant height (l) of a regular pyramid is the height of a triangular lateral face.
The height of the pyramid (h) is the length of the perpendicular line drawn from
the vertex to the base.

Pyramids are named by the shape of their base (triangular, square pyramids)

Area of a regular pyramid   A = B + (1/2) P l
    B - area of base, P - perimeter of base, l - slant height.

A cone is a solid with a circular base and one vertex.

Area of cone    A = п r^2  + п r l, l - slant

The volume (V) of a 3D figure refers to the amount of space that the solid encloses.

Volume of rectangular prism     V = B h

Volume of a triangular prism        V = (1/2) b h l

Volume of cylinder      V = п r^2 h

Oblique prisms and cylinders does not have right angles between the sides and the base.

Volume of pyramid:  V = (1/3) B h

Volume of cone      V = (1/3) п r^2 h

A sphere is a set of points in a space that are equidistant from a center point.

Hemisphere is half a sphere.

Area of a sphere    A = 4 п r^2
Volume of a sphere  V = (4/3) п r^3

A solid of revolution is the solid formed when a two dimensional object is rotated
about a line, called the axis.

====================
Analytical geomentry
====================

x, y - coordinate axes.
x - coordinate or abscissa.
(0, 0) - the origin.

Suppose the point P(x, y) moves such that A(4, -1) and B(2, 3) form a straight line.
        |  x  y  1  |
    A = |  4 -1  1  | = 0
        |  2  3  1  |

If a straight line makes an angle Q with the positive direction of x axis then
tan(Q) is called the slope of the straight line and is denoted by m:
                 m = tan(Q)
                 m = (y1 - y2)/(x1 - x2)

