
Pre  intermediate
    [ˌɪntəˈmiːdiət]

1. Getting to know you
----------------------

Where were you born?             In   Scotland.
                                    [ˈskɒtlənd]
What do you do?                  I'm a teacher.
Are you married?                 No, I'm not.

        merry - marry
       [ˈmɛri]  [ˈmæri]

Why are you learning English?    Because I need it for my job.
                                 [bɪˈkɒz]

When did you start learning English?    Two years ago.

How often do you have English classes?  Twice a week.

Where do you come from?

Present:    Hi! I'm Anton. I come from Canada, but at the moment I am living here in New York.
            I'm working as a bike messenger. I really like here in New York,
            it's the center of the universe and it's very cosmopolitan.
            I have friends from all over the world. I earn about $100 a day in this job.
                                  [ˈəʊvə]
            That's good money. I'm saving money for my education.
            I was born in Toronto, but my parents are from Bulgaria.
            They moved to Canada thirty years ago. When they first arrived they
            didn't speak any English. They worry about me. Last month I had a
            bad accident on my bike, but I'm fine now. Next September I'm going
            to study for a master degree and then I hop to get a good job.

Where does she live? Who with?

Hi. Nice to meet you. Can I ask you one or two questions?
Yes, of course.
First of all, Where do you come from?
I'm from Istanbul in Turkey.
       [ˌɪstænˈbuːl]  [ˈtɜːki]
And why are you here in England?
Well, I'm here mainly because I want to improve my English.
How much English did your know before you came?
Not a lot. I studied English at school, but I didn't learn much.
Now. I'm studying in a language a school here.
What is school?
The Shakespeare School of English.
A good name! Your English is very good now. Who's your teacher?
Thank you very much. My teacher's called David. He's great.

What do you like doing in you free time?
Do you like listening of music?
What kind of music do you like?
What did you do last weekend?
What are you doing tonight?
What are you going to do after this lesson?
How many languages does your teacher speak?
What is your teacher wearing today?

Who has a lot of friends on Facebook? How many?
Whose mums met before they were born?
Who's going to travel the world with a friend?
Whose oldest friend live in Canada?
Who's talking to their oldest friend?
Who doesn't have many friends?
Which friends don't see each other very often?
Who named his some after the friend?                      name after
Whose friend is like a sister?
Whose brother is boring?

In a survey, 10,000 couples were asked how and where they first met.
    [ˈsɜːveɪ]       [ˈkʌplz]
How do you think most couples meet?
Look at the chart and match a line with a percentage.

    at school or university
    at work
    at a bar or club
    online
    through friends
    through family
    a blind date
    while shopping
    none of these

First impressions:
     [ɪmˈprɛʃənz]

1   He was friendly, tall, attractive.
    We laughed together from the start, I think because we were both a bit nervous.
2   She smiled a lot. She has a lovely smile and amazing green eyes.
                                                [əˈmeɪzɪŋ]
    I think she was a bit nervous. I loved her red dress - it was very red indeed.
                                                                           [ɪnˈdid]

What did you talk about:
1   So many things - places we want to travel to, such as South America.
    Sport, of course. Unfortunately Dom doesn't play much sport,
    but he's going to run the marathon this year.
    His acting - I don't often go to the theatre so I didn't have a lot to say.
2   Everything - travel, we both want to visit Chile; cooking. I love it, Sally
    hates it; sport, I hate it, Sally loves it, but I am training to run the
    marathon for charity; the theatre, I have a small part in a small theatre
                [ˈʧærɪti]
    at the moment.

Any difficult moments:
1   I couldn't decide how to greet him when we first met. I shook his hand and he
    tried to kiss my cheek. That was a bit embarrassing, but we laughed about it.
                                           [ɪmˈbærəsɪŋ]
2   Not really. Oh yes, I could see that the waiter knew it was a blind date.
    That was embarrassing.
Good table manners?
1   Yes, very. He couldn't use chopsticks, but he tried.
2   Very good. I like a girl who enjoys her food and she could use chopsticks.
    I was impressed with that.

Best thing about him?
1   He was chatty and funny. He didn't just talk about himself, but he asked me
          [ˈʧæti]
    questions. It was nice to meet a guy who wasn't crazy about football.
2   The green eyes! And she was really easy to talk to. She was interested and
    interesting. She didn't just talk about sport.

Did you go on somewhere?
1   Just to the square next to the restaurant. There was a piano with a notice
    ' Please play me ' - so Don did. He can play the piano very well. It was a great
    way to end the evening. He lives out of town, so he went to get his train.
2   Well, we didn't go far. We found a piano - they are all over the city at
    the moment with signs saying ' Please play me '. I played, but I'm not very good.
    Sally sang, she can't sing at all. We made a terrible noise! It was good fun.
         [sæŋ]
    Then she caught the bus home. 
             [kɔːt]

Mark out of 10?
1   I liked him more and more as the evening progressed 8.
2   She can't sing, but I like her. 9

Would you like to meet again?
1   Maybe. We swapped numbers, so we'll see.
              [swɑpd]
2   Definitely. She left very hurriedly, but she has my number.

Social expressions
------------------
In everyday situations we use a lot of social expressions.
    -   Hi, Anna. How are you?
    -   I'm fine, thinks. How are you?

    -   Thanks you so much.
    -   My pleasure.

    -   Can I help you?
    -   No, thank you. I'm just looking.

    -   Excuse me! Is that seat free?
    -   No, sorry, I'm afraid it isn't.

    -   Bye! See you later!

    -   Of course.
    -   What's the problem?

    -   Good morning!
    -   Good morning! Lovely day again.

    -   See you tomorrow!
    -   Bye! See you later!

    -   How do you do?
    -   How do you do? Pleased to meet you.

    -   Thank you very much indeed.
    -   Don't mention it! My pleasure.

    -   I'm sorry. I can't come tonight.
    -   Never mind. Perhaps another time.

    -   Can you help me with this exercise?
    -   Of course. What's the problem?
    -   Bye.

    -   Sorry I'm late.
    -   It doesn't matter. You're here now.

I don't know what this word means.
It's really warm for the time of year.
I'm excited, but a bit nervous.

Australia
Hi, I'm Rowenna. I'm Australian, I come from Melbourne, but now I live in north
London with my husband David. He's English. David and I run an art gallery.
I just love Aboriginal art, I love all the colours and shapes. I'm preparing a new
exhibition at the moment.
I came to England in 2006 as a student. My parents wanted me to study law, but
I didn't like it. I hated it in fact. I left the course after three months and
got a job in an art gallery, that's where I met David. Then, we had the idea
of opening our own gallery just for Aboriginal art, because most English people
don't know anything about it. That was in 2006, and we borrowed 25,000 from the
bank to do it. We're lucky because the gallery really successful and we paid
the money back after just five years. I go back to Australia every year.
I usually go in the English winter because it's summer in Australia.
But I'm not going next year because, you see, I'm going to have a baby in
December. It's my first so I'm very excited.





Lesson 2.
Whatever makes you happy
------------------------

What is most important to you?
    -   good friends;
    -   a good job;
    -   being healthy;
    -   money;
    -   having fun;
    -   family.

Have you got:
                any pets?
                a bike?
                a laptop?
                a camera?
                an iPod?
                a credit card?
                any brothers and sisters?
                the teacher

Some verbs don't usually take the Present Continuous:
    think;
    know;
    believe;
    look;
    agree;
    love;
    mean;
    matter;
    need;
    own;
    understand.

What time is it? I don't know. Sorry.
I'm thirsty! I need a drink.
   [ˈθɜːsti]
I love your bag@ Where did you get it?
I think Thomas is stupid.
Her English isn't very good. I don't understand her.
He's very rich. He owns a house in Mayfair.
You look sad! What's the matter?
Sorry I forgot your birthday! Don't worry. It doesn't matter.

Play games on my Play station.
Go out with my friends.
Download music and films.
Send emails and texts.
Listen to music
Go out for a meal.
Get a takeaway pizza.
             [ˈpiːtsə]
Do nothing
Chat to friends online.

Perfect day:
    -   have a lie-in
    -   go to a cafe;
    -   meet my friends.

A recent survey into happiness:
--
25,000 per year is all we need to make us happy.
Buying things doesn't make us happy.
Experiences such as holidays and living abroad do make us happier.
Be happy with what you have. Stop wanting what you haven't got.
Enjoy what you're doing.

Your happiness depends on how you see yourself, what you want from life, and how
well you get on with other people.
But you need to know yourself. What sort of person are you? What makes you happy?
Do you know how to make yourself happier? If you can answer these questions, you
can learn to change the way you think and behave. And you can actually be happier.
It just needs practice.

A good neighbour is someone who...
    always says hello
    doesn't make too much noise.
    I never see.
    minds his/her own business
    invites me to parties
    feels at home in my house
    sometimes comes round for coffee

Lesson 3
--------
What's in the news?
===================
What is the Past Simple of these verbs? Regular and irregular:
    leave - left
    go      went
    walk
    want
    take    took
    do      did
    arrive
    decide
    become  became
    think   thought
    explain
    begin   began
    meet    met
    end

Amazing journey ends after 6,000 miles.
Ed Stafford became the first man in history to walk the length of the Amazon river
from the source to the sea. He walked for 860 days.

Ed didn't go the trip alone. His companion was Gadiel Cho Sanchez Rivera,
a forestry worker from Peru.
Cho said, "When I first met Ed, I was working in the forest. I thought he was crazy,
bit I wanted to help him and be his guide.

One day we were walking in a very dangerous part of the forest when we saw a
  hostile tribe. They didn't understand what Ed was doing there.
[ˈhɒstaɪl]
I explained he was an adventurer and he was walking the Amazon.
They decided he was crazy, too.

The Past Continuous expresses an activity in progress in the past.
    [d]              [t]            [ɪd]
  stayed           stopped        studied
  played           laughed        wanted
  phoned           looked         decided
  answered         worked         mended

News:
    politics
    celebrities
    sport
    fashion
    culture
    the arts
    crime
    international news
    national news
    local news

Do you listen to the radio? Which station?

The flight attendant who lost his cool.

What made him lose his cool?

  Emergency exit for flight attendant who lost his cool.
[ɪˈmɜːʤ ənsi]
Flight attendant Steven Slater made an emergency exit from an Airbus after he
had an argument with a passenger.
The incident happened at New York airport soon after the Jet Blue flight from
Pittsburgh landed.
As the airbus was taxiing slowly on the runway, a passenger stood up to get her
luggage. Mr. Slater told her to sit down, but she refused. The businesswoman
was taking her case out of the overhead locker when it hit Mr Slater on the head.
He started bleeding, and it was then that the flight attendant lost his temper.
He marched to the front of the cabin and spoke furiously over the plane system,
saying "That's enough! After 28 years in this business, I quit!"
He then took two beers from a fridge, opened the door and activated the plane
emergency chute and jumped onto it. Mr Slater then ran to his car and drove home.
Police arrested Mr Slater at his home a short time later.

Everyday English
----------------
What's the date today? - It's the twenty - second of June.


Lesson 4.
---------
Eat, drink, and be merry!

