Logic
For dummies
===========

Logic is natural - at least to humans.

Logic is one of the few areas of study taught in two different college
departments: maths and philosophy.

Logic was founded by Aristotle and developed by philosophers for centuries.
But, about 150 years ago, mathematicians found that logic was an indispensable
tool for grounding their work as it becase more and more abstract.

-----------------------------
I.  Overview of Logic

-----------------------------------------------
1.  What is this thing called logic?

We live in an illogical world.

One way to understand the world is to notice the connection between cause and
effect.

The premises are the facts of the matter: The statements that you know
(or strongly believe) to be true.

Logical arguments about real world situations (in constrast to mathematical or
scientific arguments) almost always have enthymemes (hidden in an argument).

Uncovering hidden premises in real world arguments is more related to rhetoric,
which is the study of how to make cogent and convincing arguments.

Logic laws:
    - the law of identity
            Every individual thing is identical to inself.
    - the law of the excluded middle
            Every statement is either true or false.
    - the law of non contradiction
            Given a statemenent and its opposite one is true and the other is false.

Math and logic go great together.

Math is built on logic as a house is built on a foundation.

-------------------------------------------------------
2.  Logical developments from Aristotle to the Computer

The ancient Greeks had a hand in discovering just about everything, and logic
is no exception.
Thales and Pythagoras applied logical argument to mathematics.
Socrates and Plato applied similar types of reasoning to philosophical questions.
Founder of classical logic was Aristotle.

Aristotle assembled in single work called Organon (means Tool). He analyzed how
a logical argument functions.

Science consisted of proofs,
proofs of syllogisms,
syllogisms of statements,
statements of terms.

In a syllogism, the premises and conclusions fit together in such a way that,
once you accept the premises as true, you must accept that the conclusion is
true as well - regardless of the content of the actual argument being made.

Categorical statements are simply statements that talk about whole categories of
objects or people.

Categorical statements:
    - universal statements;
        Tell something about an entire category.
    - particular statements;
        Tell about the existence of at least one example within a category.

The square of oppositions - a tool Aristotle developed for studying categorical
statements - organizes the four basic forms of categorical statements that
appear frequently in syllogisms.

                           Positive forms                 Negative forms


    Universal  forms:      A: All cat are sleeping.       E: No cats are sleeping.
                              No cats are not sleeping.      All cats are not 
                              Every cat is sleeping.         There isn't
    
    Particular forms:      I: Some cats are sleeping.     O: Not all cats are sleeping
                              Not all cats are not           Some cats are not
                              At least one cat is            There is
                              There exists

Contradictory pairs in diagonal: Neither A/E or O/I.

Eclid began with five axioms (called postulates) - true statements that he
believed were simple and self evident. From these axioms, he used logic to prove
theorems.

Liberal arts in universities in 12th century:
    logic, grammar, rhetoric, arithmetic, geometry, astronomy, and music.

George Boole (1815-1864)    -   Boolean algebra.
Set theory by Georg Cantor in the 1870s.
A set is just a collection of things.

Gottlob Frege (1848-1925) invented formal logic.
    E & P  => E -> ~P

Quantifiers: All, exist.


------------------------------------------
3.  Just for the sake of argument

Logic is the study of argument validity; which is whether a logical argument is
valid (good) on invalid (bad).
An argument, in logic, is a set of one or more premises followed by a conclusion,
which are often connected by one or more intermediate statements.
The premises and the conclusion are always statements - sentences that give
information and that are either true or false.
In a valid argument, if all of the premises are true, the conclusion must also
be true.

Logic is the study of how to decide the circumstances in which a set of true
premises leads to a conclusion that is also true.

The premises and the conclusion of an argument all have one thing in common:
They are statements. A statement is simply a sentece that gives information.

In a good argument - or a valid argument, as logicians say - when all the
premises are true, the conclusion must also be true.


