Books: 6.5820_Computer_Networks_Fifth_Edition_A_Systems_Approach_Larry_L_Peterson_Bruce_S_Daviewww.ebook-dl.com_.pdf

1. Foundation
-------------
1.1 Applications
1.1.1 Classes of Applications
The WWW (World Wide Web) is the Internet application that catapulted the Internet from a somewhat obscure tool used mostly by scientists and engineers to the mainstream phenomenon that it is today.

Users view pages full of textual and graphical objects and click on object that they want to learn more about, and a corresponding new page appears.
The identifier, called URL = Uniform Resource Locator provides a way of identifying all the possible objects that can be viewed from your web browser.

Another widespread application class of the Internet is the delivery of streaming audio and video.

1.2 Requirements


2. Getting Connected
--------------------
2.1 Perspectives on connecting
Networks are constructed from two classes of hardware building blocks: nodes and links.

2.2 Encoding
How bits can transmitted from one node to the other.
Signals propagate over physical links.
The task is to encode the binary data to the source node want to send into the signals that the links are able to carry and then to decode the signal back into the corresponding binary data at the receiving node.

We ignore the details of modulation and assume we are working with two discrete signals:
    high and low.
It can be two different voltages on a copper based link or two different power levels on an optical link.
Most of the functions discussed in this chapter are performed by a network adaptor.
The network adaptor contains a signalling component that actually encodes bits into signals at the sending node and decodes signals into bits at the receiving node.

     +------------+                                     +------------+
     |          --|----+                          +-----|--          |
     | Node     Adaptor |))))))))))))))))))))))))| Adaptor      Node |
     |          --|----+                          +-----|--          |
     +------------+                                     +------------+
     
                 bits            Signal             bits
                -------->========================------->

    NRZ = non-return to zero:  1 - High signal,  0 - low signal.

There are fundamental problem caused by long strings of 1s or 0s.
Long strings lead to baseline wander.
Problem to detect average and clock recovering.

ONe approach, called non-return to zero inverted (NRZI) 1 - change, 0 - no change.
This solves the problem of consecutive 1s, but obviously does nothing for consecutive 0s.

Manchester encoding, does a more explicit job of merging the clock with the signal by NOR.
Local clock alternates from low to high.
The problem is double clock - 50% information.

A final encoding that we consider, called 4B / 5B. 4bits = 5 bits.

2.3 Framing

2.6 Ethernet and Multiple Access Networks (802.3)

Carrier Sense, Multiple Access with Collision Detect (CSMA/CD).

2.7 Wireless: Wi-Fi (802.11)
2.7.1 802.11/Wi-Fi

3. Internetworking
3.1 Switching and Bridging

7. End to End Data
------------------
From the network perspective, application programs send messages to each other.
Each of these messages is just an uninterpreted string of bytes.
From application perspective these messages contain various kinds of data - arrays of integers, video frames, lines of text, digital images, and so on.

Multimedia data types require us to think about both presentation and compression.

7.1 Presentation formatting
7.2 Multimedia Data
lossless and lossy

MPEG - video compression

8. Network Security
===================

6.5820_Andrew S. Tanenbaum, Nick Feamster, David J. Wetherall - Computer Networks-Pearson (2021).pdf

1. Introduction
----------------
2. The physical layer
---------------------
2.1 Guided Transmission Media

The purpose of the physical layer is to transport bits from one machine to another.
Guided - physical cable or wire.

Each type of guided transmission media has its own set of trade-offs in terms of:
    - frequency, bandwidth, delay, cost, ease of installation and maintenance.

Bandwidth in Hz as carrying capacity of a medium.

2.1.2 Twisted Pairs
One of the oldest and still most common transmission media is twisted pair.
A twisted pair consists of two insulated copper wires, typically about 1 mm thick.
The wires are twisted together in a helical form, similar to a DNA molecule.
Two parallel wires constitute a fine antenna; when the wires are twisted, the waves from different twists cancel out, so the wire radiates less effectively.
Transmitting the signal as the difference between the two voltage levels.

The most common application of the twisted pair is the telephone system.
Both telephone calls and ADSL Internet access run over these lines.

Twisted pairs can run several kilometers without amplification, but for longer distances the signal becomes too attenuated and repeaters are needed.

Twisted pairs can be used for transmitting either analog or digital information.
The bandwidth depends on the thickness of the wire and the distance traveled, but hundreds of megabits per sec can be achieved for a few kilometers.

Due to their adequate performance, widespread availability, and low cost, twisted pairs are widely used are likely to remain so for years to come.

Category 5e or "Cat 5e" consists of two insulated wires gently twisted together.
Four such pairs are typically grouped in a plastic sheath to protect the wires and keep them together.

100 Mbps LAN Ethernet uses two pairs, one pair for each direction.
To reach higher speeds, 1 Gbps Ethernet uses all four pairs in both directions simultaneously.

UTP = unshielded twisted pair

2.1.3 Coaxial Cable

or coax

It has better shielding and greater bandwidth than unshielded twisted pairs. So it can span longer distances at higher speeds.

Two kinds of coaxial cable are widely used. One kind, 50 Ohm cable, is commonly used when it is intended for digital transmission from the start. The other kind, 75 ohm cable, is commonly used for analog transmission and cable television.

A coaxial cable consists of a stiff copper wire as the core, surrounded by an insulating material.
The insulator is encased by a cylindrical conductor, often as a closely woven braided mesh.
The outer conductor is covered in a protective plastic sheath.

The construction and shielding of the coaxial cable give it a good combination of high bandwidth and excellent noise immunity. Bandwidth up to 6 GHz.

2.1.4 Power Lines
Electrical power lines.

2.1.5 Fiber Optics
Fiber optics are used for long-haul transmission in network backbone, high-speed LANs.

An optical transmission system has three key components:
    - the light source;
    - the transmission medium;
    - detector.

    1 - light
    0 - no light

The transmission medium is an ultra thin fiber of glass.

Transmission system would leak light and be useless in practice were it not for an interesting principle of physics.
When a light ray passes from one medium to another - for example, from fused silica (glass) to air - the ray is refracted 
(bent) at the silica - air boundary.
The amount of refraction depends on the properties of two media.
For angles of incidence above a certain critical value, the light is refracted back int the silica; none of it escapes into the air.
A fiber having this property is called a multimode fiber.
If the fiber diameter is reduced to few wavelengths of light (< 10 microns, as opposed to more than 50 microns for multimode fiber), the fiber acts like a waveguide and light can propagate only in a straight line, without bouncing, yielding a single mode fiber.

Single mode fibers are more expensive but are widely used for longer distances. They can transmit signals approximately 50 times farther than multimode fibers. Up tp 100Gbps for 100 km.

Multimode fiber can be used for transmissions of up about 15 km and can allow the user of relatively less expensive fiber optic equipment.

    - Transmission of Light Through Fiber
Optical fibers are made of glass, which, in turn, is made from sand, an inexpensive raw material available in unlimited amounts.
The attenuation of light through glass depends on the wavelength of the light.
Three wavelength in the near infrared part of the spectrum used at 0.85 / 1.3 / 1.55 microns.
All three bands are 25,000 to 30,000 GHz wide.

    - Fiber Cables
Fiber optic cables are similar to coax, except without the braid.
At the center is the glass core through which the light propogates. (multimode ~ 50 microns, single ~ 8..10 microns).

The core is surrounded by a glass cladding with a lower index of refraction that the core, to keep all the light in the core. Next comes a thin plastic jacket to protect the cladding. Fibers are typically grouped in bundles, protected by an outer sheath.

Terrestrial fiber sheaths are normally laid in the ground within a meter of the surface, where they are occasionally subject to attacks by backhoes or gophers.

Fiber can be connected in three different ways.
First, they can terminate in connectors and be plugged into fiber sockets.
Connectors lose about 10 to 20% of the light, but they make it easy to reconfigure systems.
Second, they can be spliced mechanically.
Third, two pieces of fiber can be fused (melted) to form a solid connection.

Two kinds of light sources:
    - LEDs (light emitting diodes)
    - semiconductor lasers

LED: low data rate, multi-mode short distance, long life, low cost
Laser: high data rate, multi/singe modes, long distance, short life, expensive

The receiving end of an optical fiber consists of a photodiode, which gives off an electrical pulse when struck by light.
Converting time limits rate up 100Gbps.

2.2 Wireless Transmission
2.2.1 The electromagnetic Spectrum
When electrons move, they create electromagnetic waves that can propagate through space.

When antenna of the appropriate size is attached to an electrical circuit, the electromagnetic waves can be broadcast efficiently and received by a receiver some distance way.

Speed of light, 30 cm for 1 nanosecond.

2.2.2 Frequency Hopping Spread Spectrum
In FHSS, transmitter hops from frequency to frequency hundreds of times per second.
It is popular for military communication because it makes transmissions hard to detect and next to impossible to jam.
For Bluetooth and older versions of 802.11.

2.2.3 Direct Sequence Spread Spectrum
DSSS uses a code sequence to spread the data signal over a wider frequency band.
For 3G and GPS, and in 802.11b.

2.2.4 Ultra Wideband Communication
UWB sends a series of low energy rapid pulses, varying their carrier frequencies to communicate information.

2.3 Using The spectrum for transmission
2.3.1 Radio Transmission
RF (radio frequency) waves are easy to generate, can travel long distances, and can penetrate buildings easily.

2.3.2 Microwave Transmission
Above 100 MHz the waves travel in nearly straight lines and can be therefore be narrowly focused.


2.4 From Waveforms to bits
2.4.2 The maximum data rates of a channel
Even a perfect channel has a finite transmission capacity.

    Maximum date rate = 2 x B

for 3kHz it is 6000bps.

If random noise is present, the situation deteriorates rapidly.

SNR = signal to noise ratio

    Maximum data rate = B x log2 ( 1 + S/N)bits/sec

ADSL with bandwidth = 1 MHz, SNR = 40 dB = 13 Mbps

2.4.3 Digital Modulation
To send digital information, we must devise analog signals to represents bits.
The process of converting between bits and signals that represent them is called digital modulation.

    - Baseband Transmission

The most straightforward form of digital modulation is to use a positive voltage to represent a 1 bit and negative voltage to represent a 0 bit. This scheme is called NRZ (Non Return to Zero).

    - Bandwidth Efficiency
We need bandwidth of at least B/2 Hz to bit rate B bits/sec.

One strategy for using limited bandwidth more efficiently is to use more than two signaling levels.

    - Clock Recovery

    ASK (Amplitude Shift Keying)
    FSK (Frequency Shift Keying)
    PSK (Phase Shift Keying)

    to send 2 bits per symbol - QPSK (Quadrature PSK)

    QAM-16, QAM-256

    OFDM (Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiplexing)

2.6 Cellular Networks
Mobile phone (cell phones) have gone through five distinct generations, widely called 1G, 2G, 3G, 4G and 5G.

2.6.1 Common Concepts: Cells, Handoff, Paging
In all mobile phone systems, a geographical region is divided up into cells, which is why the handsets are sometimes called cell phones.


3. The Data Link Layer
----------------------
3.1 Data Link Layer Design issues

    - Providing well defined service interface to the network layer
    - Framing sequences of bytes as self contained segments
    - Detecting and correcting transmission errors
    - Regulating the flow of data so that slow receiver are not swamped by fast senders.

To accomplish these goals, the data link layer takes the packets it gets from the network layer and encapsulates them into frames for transmission.
    Frame:
        - header
        - payload
        - trailer

3.1.1 Serves Provided to the Network Layer
The principal service of the link layer is transferring data from the network layer on the source machine to the network layer on the destination machine.

    Services:
        - unacknowledged connectionless     -> Ethernet
        - acknowledged connectionless       -> WiFi (unreliable channel)
        - acknowledged connection

3.1.2 Framing
The physical layer accepts a raw bit stream and attempts to deliver it to the destination.

3.1.3 Error Control
3.1.4 Flow Control

3.2 Error Detection and Correction
LDPC = Low Density Parity Check are linear block code.

3.3 Elementary Data Link Protocols
3.3.1 Initial Simplifying Assumptions
Physical/Link/Network layers are independent processes that communicate by passing messages back and forth.

The physical layer process and some of the data link layer process run on dedicated hardware called a NIC = Network Interface Card.

3.3.2 Basic Transmission and Receipt

3.5 Data Link Protocols in Practice

PPP = Point to Point Protocol is used to send packets over links.
SONET, ADSL, DOCSIS links apply PPP.

3.5.1 Packet over SONET
SONET is the physical layer protocol that is most commonly used over the wide area optical fiber links that make up the backbone of communications networks. It provides a bitstream up tp 2.4 Gbps.

PPP improves on an earlier simpler protocol called SLIP (serial line internet protocol).

3.5.2 ADSL
Between ADSL and PPP are ATM (asynchronous transfer mode) and AAL5.

3.5.3 DOCSIS = Data Over Cable Service Interface Specification
PHY layer called PMD and MAC (media access control).

4. MAC
------
4.1 The Channel Allocation Problem

4.2.1 ALOHA

    CSMA = Carrier Sense Multiple Access
    CSMA/CD = CSMA with Collision Detection -> Ethernet

4.3 Ethernet

    IEEE 802.3

Preamble with 10101010.
Dst address
Src address
Type
Data
Pad
Check sum

4.4 Wireless LAN
4.4.1 The 802.11 Architecture and Protocol Stack
Can used in two modes. The most popular mode is to connect clients, such as laptops and smartphones, to another network, such as a company intranet or the Internet.
In infrastructure mode, each clients is associated with an AP (Access Point) that is in turn connected to the other network.

4.4.2 The 802.11 Physical Layer

2.4G and 5G

CDMA

FrameControl
Duration
Addr 1
Addr 2
Addr 3
Seq
Data
Check Sum

4.5 Bluetooth
In 1994, the Swedish company L.M. Ericsson became interested in connecting its mobile phones to other devices (e.g., laptops) without cables. Together with four other companies (IBM, Intel, Nokia and Toshiba) it formed a SIG (Special Interest Group, i.e., consortium) in 1998 to develop a wireless standard for connecting computing and communication devices and accessories using short range, low-power, inexpensive wireless radios.
Harald Blaatand (Bluetooth) II (940-981) a Viking king who unified Denmark and Norway.

All manner of consumer electronic devices now use bluetooth, from mobile phones and laptops to headsets, printers, keyboards, mice, game consoles, watches, music players, navigation units, and more.
The Bluetooth protocols let these devices find and connect to each other, an act called pairing, and securely transfer data.

4.5.1 Bluetooth Architecture
The basic unit of a Bluetooth system is a piconet, which consists of a controller node and up to seven active worker nodes within a distance of 10 meters.
Multiple piconets can exist in the same room and can even be connected via a bridge node that takes part in multiple piconets.

The reason for the controller / worker design is that the designers intended to facilitate the implementation of complete Bluetooth chips for under 5$. At its heart, a piconet is a centralized TDM system, with the controller controlling the clock and determining which device gets to communicate in which time slot.

4.5.2 Bluetooth Applications
802.11 does not specify whether users should use their laptop computers for reading email, surfing the Web, or something else.
In contrast, the Bluetooth SIG specifies particular applications to be supported and provides different protocol stacks for each one.
Six of the profiles are for different uses of audio and video.
The headset and handsfree profiles both provide voice communication between a headset and its base station.

4.5.4 The Bluetooth Radio Layer
2.4 GHz. The band is divided into 79 channels of 1 MHz each.
Frequency hopping spread spectrum is used.
1600 hops/sec over slots with a dwell time of 625 usec.


4.7 Data Link Layer Switching
To connect multiple LAN.
The Ethernet switches are a modern name for bridges, they provide functionality that goes beyond classic Ethernet and Ethernet hubs to make it easy to join multiple LAN into a larger and faster network.

Bridges operate in the data link layer, so they examine the data link layer addresses to forward frames.

4.7.1 Uses of Bridges
4.7.2 Learning Bridges
The bridges are the devices to which the stations and hub are attached.

Each bridge operates in promiscuous mode, that is, it accepts every frame transmitted by the stations attached to each of its ports.
The bridge must decide whether to forward or discard each frame, and, if the former, on which port to output the frame.
This decision is made by using the destination address.

A simple way to implement this scheme is to have a big (hash) table inside the bridge.
When the bridges are first plugged in, all the hash table are empty. None of the bridges know where any of the destinations are, so they use a flooding algorithm. As time goes on, the bridges learn where destinations are.
Once a destination is known, frames destined for it are put only the proper port; they are not flooded.

4.7.3 Spanning Tree Bridges
To increase reliability, redundant links can be used between bridges.
There are two links in parallel between a pair of bridges. It creates loops in the topology.
The spanning tree algorithm was then standardized as IEEE 802.1D.

4.7.4 Repeaters, Hubs, Bridges, Switches, Routers, and Gateways.
The key to understanding these devices is to realize that they operate in different layers.

    Application Layer   -> Application gateway
    Transport Layer     -> Transport gateway
    Network Layer       -> router
    Data Link Layer     -> Bridge/switch
    Physical Layer      -> Repeater, hub

Repeaters are analog devices that work with signals on the cables to which they are connected.
A signal appearing on one cable is cleaned up, amplified, and put out on another cable.
Repeaters do not understand frames, packets, or headers.

A hub has a number of input lines that it joins electrically. Frames arriving on any of the lines are sent out on all the others.

A bridge connects two or more LANs. Like a hub, a modern bridge has multiple ports, from 4 to 48 input lines.
Unlike in a hub, each port is isolated to be in own collision domain.
When a frame arrives the bridge extracts the destination address from the frame header and looks it up in a table to see where to send the frame.

Switches are modern bridges by another name. The differences are more to do with marketing than technical issues, but there are a few points worth knowing. The term "switch" is more popular nowadays.

Router get payload of every packets. Software uses the packet header to choose an output line. For an IP packet, the packet header will contain a IPv4/v6 address.

Transport gateway. These connect two computers that use different connection oriented transport protocols.

4.7.5 Virtual LANs
VLAN are based on VLAN aware switches. To set up a VLAN based network, the network administrator decides how many VLANs there will be, which computers will be on which VLAN, and what the VLANs will be called.

IEEE 802.1Q

Tagged frame


5. The Network Layer
--------------------
5.1 Network Layer Design Issues
5.1.2 Services Provided to the Transport Layer
Provides services to the transport layer:
    - the services should be independent of the router technology
    - the transport layer should be shielded from the number, type and topology of the routers present.
    - the network addresses made available to the transport layer should use a uniform numbering plan, even across LAN and WAN.

5.1.3 Implementation of connectionless service

Packets are called datagrams and the network is called a datagram network.
Defragmentation packets.
IP is the dominant example of a connectionless network service.

5.1.4 Implementation of connection oriented service

5.2 Routing Algorithms in a Single Network
This process is forwarding.
Nonadaptive/adaptive algorithms -> static/dynamic routing.

5.4 Quality of Service and Application QOE
The techniques we looked at in the previous sections are designed to reduce congestion and improve network performance. Sometimes need best effort.

5.4.1 Application QoS Requirements
A stream of packets from a source to a destination is called a flow.
The needs of each flow can be characterized by four primary parameters: bandwidth, delay, jitter and loss.
Together, these determine the QoS = Quality of Service.

The variation in the delay or packet arrival times is called jitter.

5.5 Internetworking
5.5.4 Connecting Endpoints Across Heterogeneous Networks
Tunneling
VPNs = Virtual Private Networks

5.7 The Network Layer in the Internet

5.7.6 Internet Control Protocols
ICMP, ARP, DHCP

6. Transport Layer
------------------
6.1 The Transport Service
6.1.1 Services Provided to the Upper Layers
The ultimate goal of the transport layer is to provide efficient, reliable, and cost-effective data transmission service to its user, normally processes in the application layer.

Connection oriented and connectionless.

6.1.2 Transport Service Primitives

    Listen  - block until process tries to connect
    Connect - actively attempt to establish a connection
    Send - send information
    Receive - Block until a data packet arrives
    Disconnect

Segment for messages sent from transport entity to transport entity.
TCP, UDP and other Internet Protocols.

6.1.3 Berkeley Sockets
Berkeley UNIX 4.2 BSD in 1983.

    Socket
    Bind
    Listen
    Accept
    Connect
    Send / Receive
    Close

6.4 UDP
User Datagram Protocol

6.4.3 Real Time Transport Protocols
Real Time multimedia applications.
RTCP - The Real Time Transport Control Protocol

6.5 TCP
Transmission Control Protocol

7. Application Layer
--------------------
7.1 DNS = Domain Name System

7.2 Electronic Mail
email

Email is full of jargon such as BTW (by the way), ROTFL (Rolling On the Floor Laughing).
IMHO (in my humble opinion).
ASCII symbols called smileys, starting with ubiquitous :-).
This symbol and other emoticons help to convey the tone of the message.

Email system architecture consists of two kinds of subsystems: the user agents and message transfer agents.

The user agent is a program that provides a graphical interface, or sometimes a text and command based interface.

The message transfer agents are typically system processes.
They run in the background on mail server machines and are intended to be always available.
SMTP = Simple Mail Transfer Protocol.

Webmail


7.3 WWW = World Wide Web
Collection of content in the form of Web pages.
A page may also link to other Web pages.
Pages are generally viewed with a program called a browser.

HTTP = Hyper Text Transfer Protocol
HTTPS = Secure HTTP

URL = Uniform Resource Locator.

HTML = Hypertext Markup Language
CSS = Cascading Style Sheets

CGI = Common Gateway Interface

By convention, programs invoked via CGI live in a directory called cgi-bin.

A popular language for writing scripts - PHP = Hypertext Preprocessor.

With JavaScript, when the submit button is clicked the browser interprets a JavaScript function contained on the page.

7.3.4 HTTP and HTTPS
HTTPS protocol over a sercure transport protocol called TLS = Transport Layer Security.

HTTP is a simply request response protocol.
Operations called methods.
Each request consists of one or more lines of ASCII text.
The names are case sensitive.

The GET method requests the server to send the pages.

    GET     - read a Web page
    HEAD    - read a Web page header
    POST    - Append to a Web page
    PUT     - Store a web page
    DELETE  - remove the web page
    TRACE   - echo the incoming request
    CONNECT - conncet through a proxy
    OPTION  - Query options for a page.

    GET filename HTTP/1.1

Every request gets a response consisting of a status line, and possibly additional information.
The status line: 
    1xx Information
    2xx Success             200 = request succeeded
    3xx Redirection
    4xx Client error        404 = page not found
    5xx Server error

Cookies are small files that servers place on client computers to remember information for later.


7.4 Streaming Audio and Video

7.4.2 Digital Video
Pixels: 1280x720 = 720p
        1920x1080 = 1080p or HD
        3840x2160 = 4k
        7680x4320 = 8k

    - Video Compression
MPEG = Motion Picture Experts Group
JPEG = Joint Photographic Experts Group

7.4.3 Streaming Stored Media
VoD = Video on Demand.

RTP = Real Time Protocol
TCP or UDP. UDP due to congestion errors, but we can use forward error correction.

DASH = Dynamic Adaptive Streaming over HTTP.

8. Network Security
-------------------
8.1 Fundamentals of Networking Security
The classic way to deal with network security problems is to distinguish three essential security properties:
    - confidentiality
    - integrity
    - availability

    CIA abbr

Confidentiality has to do with keeping information out of the grubby little hands of unauthorized.
Integrity is all about ensuring that the information you received was really the information sent and not something that an adversary modified.
Availability deals with preventing system and services from becoming unusable due to crashes, overload situations, or deliberate misconfigurations.

Authentication deals with determining whom you are talking to before revealing sensitive information or entering into a business deal.

8.1.1 Fundamental Security Principles

8.4 Cryptography

Cryptography comes from the Greek words for secret writing.

    ciphers vs codes
A cipher is a character for character or bit for bit transformation.

Plaintext are transformed by a key. The output is ciphertext.
The art of breaking ciphers, known as cryptoanalysis.

8.5 Symmetric key algorithms
Use the same key for encryption and decryption.

Cipher Modes: AES (DES) - 128 bits.

8.6 Public Key Algorithms
Requires each user to have two keys: a public key, used by the entire world for encrypting messages to be sent to that user, and a private key, which the user needs for decrypting messages.

RSA

SHA - Secure Hash Algorithm

CA = Certification Authority

8.9 Authentication Protocols

Based on Shared Secret Key

8.10 Communication Security

IPsec
VPN = Virtual Private Networks

8.10.3 Wireless Security
WPA2 = WiFi Protection Access 2

802.1X EAP = Extensible Authentication Protocol

8.12.3 TLS
SSL = Secure Sockets Layer

