Books: 24.00_Introduction_to_Philosophy-WEB_cszrKYp.pdf

1. Introduction to Philosophy
=============================
Unlike most of your other courses, philosophy is not something usually covered in
high school.

1.1 What is Philosophy?
It is difficult to define philosophy. It is itself a philosophical activity, since philosophers are attempting to gain the broadest and most fundamental conception of the world as it exists.

The world includes:
    - nature
    - consciousness
    - morality
    - beauty
    - social organizations

    - Historical Origins of Philosophy
The word philosophy derives from ancient Greek, in which the philosopher is a lover or pursuer of wisdom.
But the earliest Greek philosophers were not known as philosophers, they were simply known as sages.
Sages are sometimes associated with mathematical and scientific discoveries and at other times with their political impact.

    -- The Sages of India, China, Africa, and Greece

Vedic tradition = the classical Indian religious and philosophical tradition.

Confucius is one of the greatest Chinese writers, often refers to ancient sages.

Seven sages is the ancient Greeks.
The first and most important sage is Thales of Miletus. Thales traveled to Egypt to study with Egyptian priest, where he became one of the first Greeks to learn astronomy. 

    -- Beginnings of Natural Philosophy
The sage tradition is a largely prehistoric tradition that provides a narrative about how intellect, wisdom, piety, and virtue led to the innovations central to flourishing of ancient civilizations.
Greek ancient scientists or philosophers try to explain nature using rational methods.

The Pythagoreans were excellent mathematicians, but they were more interested in how mathematics explained the natural world.

    - How it all hangs together

1.2 How do philosophers arrive at truth?

    - Sources of Evidence
    -- History
    -- Intuition
Plato: Intuition involved a kind of insight into the very nature of things.
    -- Common Sense
It is frequently used to describe a basic set of facts or common knowledge that any adult human being ought to possess.
Philosophers mean specific claims based on direct sense perception, which the true in a relatively fundamental sense.

    -- Experimental Philosophy
    -- Results from other disciplines

    - Logic
One of the first and most reliable ways that philosophers have of verifying and analyzing claims is by using logic.
Logic attempts to formalize the process that we use or ought to use when we provide reasons for some claims.

    -- argument
The first and most important move in logic is to recognize that claims are the product of arguments.
A claim is just the conclusion of a series of sentences, when the preceding sentences (premises) provide evidence for the conclusion.

    -- explanation
While arguments can be thought of as building blocks to construct a solid foundation for beliefs about the world, arguments can also be understood as explanations for phenomena that are evident but not well understood.

    -- coherence
Finally, logic provides philosopher with a powerful technique for assessing a set of claims or beliefs. We can ask whether a set of beliefs is logically consistent with one another.

    - Conceptual Analysis
    -- Predicates
Modern logic.
    -- Descriptions
    -- Enumeration
    -- Thought experiments

    - Trade-offs
Conceptual analysis, logic and sources of evidence together help philosophers compose a picture of the world that helps get a better gasp of truth.

1.3 Socrates as paradigmatic historical philosopher
Socrates is a foundational figure for Western philosophy.
Even though he did not write any works himself, his life and thought are captured by three different, contemparary sources whose works we still have.
Socrates is depicted in several of Aristophanes comedic plays.

    -- examination of the Self
The first form of examination that Socrates clearly advises is self examination.

    -- examination of Nature

    - Human Wisdom is worth little of Nothing
In the excerpt from Plato Apology, Socrates investigates the oracle strange response that he is the wisest of men.
He alone realizes that human wisdom is worth little or nothing.

    -- understanding the limits of knowledge
Even the most respected scientists, philosophers, mathematicians, and historians recognize that the scope of their expertise is extremely limited.

    -- The Socratic Method
That was characterized by his asking questions of others rather than explaining his own beliefs.
Socrates is typically hesitant to offer his own ideas about the topic under discussion.

    - The importance of Doing No Harm
Socrates is much more concerned with ethics, or how to live a good life.

Socrates harm principle claims the following:
    - No one willingly chooses what is harmful to themselves.
    - When a person does harm to others, they actually harm themselves.

1.4 An overview of contemporary philosophy
Contemporary academic philosophy bears minimal resemblance to the classical traditions.
Philosophers today, like other academics, focus on specific areas of research expertise with the goal of producing new research that advanced our philosophical understanding of specific problems or topic areas.

Majoring in philosophy is a great way to complete a liberal arts degree. Philosophy will introduce you to
fascinating ideas and teach you to think analytically and creatively. If you enjoy the topics in this book, you
should consider a philosophy major.

    - Alternatives to Academic Philosophy

2. Critical Thinking, Research, Reading, and Writing
====================================================
Critical thinking is a specific skill. It is set of skills, and attitudes that promote reflective, clear reasoning.
Studying philosophy can be particularly helpful for developing good critical thinking skills.

2.1 The brain is an inference machine

One of the first steps to becoming a more critical and reflective thinker is to understand how and why you are prone to making mistakes in thinking. These mistakes are not the result of a lack of intelligence but are a function of the way our minds work and how they naturally lead us astray.

    - the brain adaptive ability to plan ahead

One insight of evolutionary biology is that every cell and organ in our body is adapted to its local environment
for the purpose of making it more likely that our genes will survive into the next generation.

Our brains facilitate our survival and promote
our ability to find a partner and reproduce by using thought, calculation, prediction, and inference. For this
reason, our natural and genetically primed ways of thinking do not necessarily serve the goals of philosophy,
science, or truth.

The "mind-brain" problem points to the unclear relationship between our thoughts, feelings, and
perceptions, and the neurological and electrochemical interactions that take place in the brain.

    -- philosophical caveats about brain talk

Brains vs Minds
The relationship between mind and brain is one of the central problems of metaphysics, known as the mind - body problem, which might just as well be called the mind - brain problem.

Briefly stated, the mind - body problem is the problem of understanding the relationship between the organic gray and white matter in our skulls (the brain) and the range of conscious awareness (the mind).

We know that the brain and central nervous system provide the physical basis for our thoughts, perceptions, emotions, imagination, and desire - in short, our entire mental life.

But biology does not tell us what the relationship is between our private mental life and the neurological, electrochemical interactions that take place in the brain.

Is the relationship of the mind to the brain like the relationship between lightning and
electrical discharge or a rainbow and the refraction of light through water droplets? In other words, is “the
mind” just the term we use to label certain kinds of brain activity? Some philosophers think so.

However, mental activity is not easily associated with any specific brain activity. Additionally, there seems to be
something about the subjective experience of our mental life that is lost when we attempt to explain it fully in
terms of brain activity. So other philosophers maintain that the mind is something different from the brain.

Nonetheless, the mind and the brain are closely and somewhat mysteriously connected. As a result, it can be
helpful to use the resources of psychology and cognitive science (the study of the brain’s processes) to help us
understand how to become better thinkers.

We can think of the resources from psychology and cognitive science as providing us with a description of how the brain actually behaves.

By contrast, when we study critical thinking, we are interested in how we ought to think. Being aware of how we do think may help us devise effective strategies for how we ought to think, but we should understand that the descriptions provided by psychology are not determinative.

    - Representation as Projection

While you may consider thinking to be made up of ideas or thoughts, philosophers and cognitive scientists use
the term representation to describe the basic elements of thinking. Representations are information-bearing
units of thought.

This notion of representation can be traced back to Aristotle and has played a significant role
in the history of philosophy, but in contemporary philosophy the term representation is more precise. When
we think about things, whether through perception, imagination, memory, or desire, we represent those
things. What is represented may be something present and real, or it may be fictitious, imagined in the future,
or remembered from the past. Representations may even be unconscious. That is, the mind may have some
defined content that is directed toward an object without the person being aware that they have produced such
a representation.

During the process of representation, even in a relatively simple case of visual perception, the brain makes a
complex set of inferences.

You probably think that sense perception is the clearest and most
certain way you can know the world around you. As the adage says, “Seeing is believing.” To become a better
critical thinker, however, you will need to become skeptical of some of your basic beliefs. There are times when
you absolutely should not believe your lying eyes.

    -- emotions and reason: Homeostasis and Allostasis

Thinking is not always as rational as we imagine.

The neuroscientist Antonio Damasio (1994) was one of the first to popularize the notion that rational thought is tempered by emotions. He is critical of what he perceives as the philosophical bias against emotion in the
history of philosophy.

In Descartes Error, he says modern philosophers have neglected the role of emotions in
thought, imagining that the goal of rational thinking is to eliminate the influence of emotions. Instead, his
years of clinical work with patients revealed to him that emotions cannot be separated from reason. Our most
rational thoughts are, in fact, guided, informed, and influenced by emotions. According to Damasio, reasoning
and intelligence function best when we care about something. Without feelings, says Damasio, we are less
rational, not more rational.

Damasio (1994) explains that emotions serve to maintain homeostasis in the brain through the chemical
messengers known as neurotransmitters. Homeostasis is the biological tendency to find a neutral state of
equilibrium (the word stasis means “standing still,” and homeo means “same or similar”). This process relies
on a feedback loop where current bodily states are monitored, observed, and then altered to bring the body
back into balance. Most homeostatic processes in the body are unconscious, but emotions are linked to
conscious awareness. For instance, when your blood sugar is low and your body needs calories, there is a
series of chemical processes that give rise to the feeling of hunger. This is a conscious signal that you need to
eat; it promotes behavior that ensures survival. Similarly, a rustling sound in the bushes at night will trigger a
series of physiological responses (heightened senses, increased heart rate, pupil dilation, etc.) that correspond
to the feeling of fear and promote behavior, such as fight or flight, that are necessary for survival. What
Damasio demonstrates is that emotions have their own feedback mechanism, so that an idea or image can
generate physiological responses even in the absence of an external stimulus. Because emotional responses
and conscious thought are closely linked, decision-making can be influenced by this emotional physiological
feedback mechanism. Our thinking can go astray because we are afraid of bad outcomes, and that fear
dominates a more rational calculation about which course of action is most beneficial.

Psychologist Lisa Feldman Barrett (2017)
explains that the brain stores neural pathways that are triggered by external or internal stimuli to provide the
closest match to the current situation. The neural pathways form a kind of template of action, promoting
behavior like increased heart rate, pupil dilation, or motion. Feelings are a goal oriented response to certain
situations: they prepare us to behave and react in certain ways that promote what is beneficial to the body and
sharpen and shape our awareness of the world.

In summary, the brain makes inferences about the world through perceptions, emotions, and concepts that are
largely unconscious and deeply ingrained in our psyches. This process allows us to navigate fluidly and
accurately through a world with so many and varied stimuli.

    - The evolutionary advantage of shortcuts

Human beings have evolved to navigate the world most effectively and efficiently by engaging conscious awareness only when necessary.

All that biomechanical activity can be outsourced to unconscious mechanisms as you scan your shopping list. The brain is quite good at engaging in habitual activities without the assistance of conscious thought. And that is a good thing because conscious thought is expensive in energy terms.

A different type of thinking is required to solve a math problem. Try to solve the following in your head:
24 × 14 = Do you know the answer? For most people, multiplying two-digit numbers without pen and paper (or a
calculator) is quite difficult. You might need perhaps 10 or 20 seconds of effortful thinking to solve the problem
in your head since you do not have the unconscious mechanisms to do so automatically.

Long-term social and
evolutionary pressures have shaped our brains to find efficient solutions to complex questions about facial
expressions. The same cannot be said for math problems. Knowing the solution to a math problem may be
useful, but it is not the sort of thing generally required for survival and reproduction. On the other hand,
quickly reading other people’s emotions is at times vital for survival. There are other interesting differences
between these two kinds of thinking. While it is difficult to solve the math problem, once you solve it, you can
be 100 percent certain the answer is correct. By contrast, it is easy to generate a story about facial expressions,
but this story is highly susceptible to error, bias, and stereotyping. As a result, critical thinkers should be
careful not to jump to the first, most obvious solution.

    - Energy demands on deliberate thinking

Solving a math problem requires rational thought and effort. When we engage in rational thought, our brains
use up precious energy stores that may be required for the maintenance of the body. Because evolutionary
pressures seek to keep us alive long enough to pass our genes to the next generation, we have a biological
tendency to avoid effortful thinking. In a sense, it is evolutionarily wise to be lazy.

The resources demanded by conscious thought can be understood in terms of the familiar notion of
“attention.” When a task requires significant attention, it places increased energy demands on the brain.
Periods of high-attention activity can be stressful, as the body increases blood flow to the brain, delivering
more glucose and oxygen for increased mental activity. Additionally, attention is limited and focused on
specific tasks.

    -- Heuristics and Learning

Kahneman (2013) calls these mental shortcuts heuristics, or rules of thumb for drawing inferences. Problem -
solving with heuristics is largely unconscious, automated, effortless, and efficient, but it is not always correct.
Rational thinking or computation requires conscious attention and effort and may not even be possible
without some practice. We are forced to engage in effortful thinking when confronted with something new and
possibly dangerous — or even with something slightly outside of our normal routine.

For example, you have
probably driven home from work or school along a familiar route on “autopilot,” preoccupied with your
thoughts. Maybe you have even gotten home and felt as if you cannot remember how you got there. By contrast,
you have probably experienced the stress of navigating a new, unfamiliar city. In the first case, navigation can
be carried out using easy, largely automatic processing, whereas in the second case, navigation requires the
intense resources of active attention and rational calculation.

Sometimes complex activities can become effortless, but unlike when we are on “automatic pilot,” such
activities feel pleasant and fulfilling. When you become fully immersed in a complex activity to the point at
which it becomes effortless, you have entered the state of “flow”.

What this means is that a person may be able to rely on intuitions, gut reactions, and other automatic responses in a field in which they are an expert, but the novice should be skeptical of these methods of thinking.

    -- Heuristics and Substitution in Decision Making

When the brain defaults to heuristics that produce a less-than-optimal result or even an incorrect decision, it
is operating with a cognitive bias. A cognitive bias is a pattern of “quick” thinking based on the “rule of
thumb.”

2.2 Overcoming Cognitive Biases and Engaging in Critical Reflection

To resist the potential pitfalls of cognitive biases, we have taken some time to recognize why we fall prey to
them. Now we need to understand how to resist easy, automatic, and error-prone thinking in favor of more
reflective, critical thinking.

Reflective thought can be a valuable tool in correcting cognitive biases.
The critical aspect of critical reflection involves a willingness to be skeptical of
your own beliefs, your gut reactions, and your intuitions. Additionally, the critical aspect engages in a more
analytic approach to the problem or situation you are considering. You should assess the facts, consider the
evidence, try to employ logic, and resist the quick, immediate, and likely conclusion you want to draw. By
reflecting critically on your own thinking, you can become aware of the natural tendency for your mind to slide
into mental shortcuts.

This process of critical reflection is often called metacognition in the literature of pedagogy and psychology.
Metacognition means thinking about thinking and involves the kind of self-awareness that engages higher
order thinking skills. Cognition, or the way we typically engage with the world around us, is first-order
thinking, while metacognition is higher-order thinking. From a metacognitive frame, we can critically assess
our thought process, become skeptical of our gut reactions and intuitions, and reconsider our cognitive
tendencies and biases.

To improve metacognition and critical reflection, we need to encourage the kind of self-aware, conscious, and
effortful attention that may feel unnatural and may be tiring. Typical activities associated with metacognition
include checking, planning, selecting, inferring, self-interrogating, interpreting an ongoing experience, and
making judgments about what one does and does not know.

Good study habits, including managing your workspace, giving yourself plenty of time, and working through a
checklist, can promote metacognition. When you feel stressed out or pressed for time, you are more likely to
make quick decisions that lead to error. Stress and lack of time also discourage critical reflection because they
rob your brain of the resources necessary to engage in rational, attention-filled thought. By contrast, when you
relax and give yourself time to think through problems, you will be clearer, more thoughtful, and less likely to
rush to the first conclusion that leaps to mind. Similarly, background noise, distracting activity, and
interruptions will prevent you from paying attention. You can use this checklist to try to encourage
metacognition when you study:
    • Check your work.
    • Plan ahead.
    • Select the most useful material.
    • Infer from your past grades to focus on what you need to study.
    • Ask yourself how well you understand the concepts.
    • Check your weaknesses.
    • Assess whether you are following the arguments and claims you are working on.

    - Cognitive Biases
Cognitive biases are closely related to informal fallacies. Both fallacies and
biases provide examples of the ways we make errors in reasoning.

    -- Confirmation Bias
One of the most common cognitive biases is confirmation bias, which is the tendency to search for, interpret, favor, and recall information that confirms or supports your prior beliefs.

Like all cognitive biases, confirmation bias serves an important function.

You will be looking for information that confirms your
belief that it is raining. Thus, you can see how confirmation bias—based on the idea that the world does not
change dramatically over time—is an important tool for navigating in our environment.

When searching for information on the internet about an event or topic, most people look for
information that confirms their prior beliefs rather than what undercuts them. The pervasive presence of
social media in our lives is exacerbating the effects of confirmation bias since the computer algorithms used
by social media platforms steer people toward content that reinforces their current beliefs and
predispositions.

Confirmation bias is a result of the brain’s limited ability to process information.

    -- Anchoring Bias

Confirmation bias is closely related to another bias known as anchoring. Anchoring bias refers to our
tendency to rely on initial values, prices, or quantities when estimating the actual value, price, or quantity of
something.

The initial value “anchors” subsequent estimates.

Even though the initial anchoring value was random, people in the
study found it difficult to deviate far from that number.

    -- Availability Heuristic
The availability heuristic refers to the tendency to evaluate new information based on the most recent or most
easily recalled examples. The availability heuristic occurs when people take easily remembered instances as
being more representative than they objectively are.

    -- Tribalism
Another more loosely defined category of cognitive bias is the tendency for human beings to align themselves
with groups with whom they share values and practices. The tendency toward tribalism is an evolutionary
advantage for social creatures like human beings. By forming groups to share knowledge and distribute work,
we are much more likely to survive.

    -- Sunk Cost Fallacy

Sunk costs refer to the time, energy, money, or other costs that have been paid in the past. These costs are
“sunk” because they cannot be recovered. The sunk cost fallacy is thinking that attaches a value to things in
which you have already invested resources that is greater than the value those things have today. Human
beings have a natural tendency to hang on to whatever they invest in and are loath to give something up even
after it has been proven to be a liability.

A similar type of faulty reasoning leads to the gambler’s fallacy, in which a person reasons that future chance
events will be more likely if they have not happened recently. For instance, if I flip a coin many times in a row, I
may get a string of heads.


2.3 Developing Good Habits of Mind

One of the ways to respond to cognitive biases is to develop good habits of mind.
There are no quick fixes or easy solutions to cognitive biases.
These biases are a result of the way the brain works.

    - Strive for Objectivity
To be more objective in thinking about issues, problems, or values, we should actively engage in strategies that remove us from our naturally subjective mindset.

    -- Abstract from Specific Circumstances
Most people's point of view is based on generalizing from their specific circumstances and experiences.
If your view of morality, consciousness, or free will is tied to notions that come from a specific time or location, then your view is not likely to be objective.
Your personal experience has limitations when it comes to understanding what is going on in the world at large.
To arrive at more general and representative notions, use your imagination to separate the specific properties of your experience from your worldview.

    -- promote alternative points of view
Actively considering points of view contrary to your own is most useful in political or ethical areas of philosophy.

    -- Identify Counterexamples
Generating counterexamples is an effective way to test your own or other's claims.

    -- Maintain Skepticism of Strong Emotions
While emotions play an important role in thinking, they can also cloud judgment.
You should be wary of any strong attachment or aversion you feel toward a philosophical claim.

    - Adopt Epistemic Humility
    -- Question Yourself: Do I Really know What I Think I Know?

2.4 Gathering Information, Evaluating Sources, and Understanding Evidence
    - Start with a Strong Foundation
Not all internet sources are reliable.

2.5 Reading Philosophy
Read primary and secondary sources in philosophy.
    - Prepare to Read
Dialectic, a method for discovering truth through dialogue, involves an exchange of ideas with the goal of arriving at a position that more accurately reflects the truth.

2.6 Writing Philosophy Papers

3. The Early History of Philosophy around the World
===================================================
Homo sapiens inhabited the earth for at least 250,000 years, originating in the Blue Nile rift region of northern Africa.
However, the oldest forms of human writing were discovered in ancient Sumer, in Mesopotamia, between the Tigris and Euphrates Rivers where they enter the Persian Gulf, dating to around 3500 BCE.

3.1 Indigenous Philosophy
Some of the best-known ancient texts, connected to many of the great civilizations around the world, are religious or mythological in nature:
    - Vedas of India
    - the earliest literature of China
    - Jewish Talmud
 = Origins of the cosmos and the nature and purpose of human life, morality, justice, human excellence, knowledge, and so forth - in terms of stories and explanations that rely on the supernatural. Such texts are a testament to the fundamental and binding nature of religion in human societies.

When humans shift from religious answers to questions about purpose and meaning to more naturalistic and logical answers,
they move from the realm of myth to the realm of reason. In Greek, this movement is described as a move from mythos to logos, where mythos signifies the supernatural stories people tell, while logos signifies the rational, logical, and scientific stories they tell.

The earliest philosophers in Greece, Rome, India, China, and North Africa all used mythological and analogical stories to explain their rational systems, while religious texts from the same period often engage in serious, logical argumentation.

    - Indigenous African Philosophy
Africa was home to the development of many ancient writing systems, including the system of ancient Egyptian hieroglyphics that developed the fourth millennium.

    - Maya
The Maya had a complex understanding of time. They recognized an experiential or existential aspect of time.

3.2 Classical Indian Philosophy
Beginning with the Vedic texts, which date from between the seventh and sixth centuries BCE, Indian philosophical traditions are a few centuries older than the earliest European philosophical traditions.

    - The Vedic Tradition
The earliest philosophical texts in India constitute the Vedic tradition. The four Vedas are the oldest of the Hindu scriptures. They are the Rigveda, the Samaveda, the Yajurveda, and the Atharvaveda.
The four Vedas were composed between 1500 and 1900 BCE by the Indo - Aryan tribes that had settled in northern India.
Vedas means "hearing" in Sanskrit. For hundreads of years, the Vedas were recited orally.
Hindus believe that the Vedas were divinely inspired.

The Rigveda is a collection of the "family books" of 10 clans, each of which were reluctant to part with their secret ancestral knowledge.

The Samaveda contains many of the Rigveda hymns but ascribe to those hymns melodies so that they can be chanted.

The Yajurveda contains hymns that accompany rites of healing and other types of rituals.

The Atharvaveda incorporates rituals that reveal the daily customs and beliefs of the people, including their traditions surrounding birth and death.

The Vedic texts state that through reflection on the self, one comes to understand the cosmos.
These texts claim the there is a structural analogy between the self and the universe.
Through inner reflection on oneself, one can then understand the nature of the world.

The Rigveda examines the origin of the universe and asks whether the gods created humanity or humans created the gods.

The idea that emerges within Hinduism is that the universe is cyclical in nature. The cycle of the seasons and the cyclical nature of other processes are understood to mirror the cycle of birth, death, the rebirth among humans and other animals. Related to this conception is the philosophical question of how one puts an end to this cycle. The Hindus suggest that the answer lies in purification, with ascetic rituals provided as means to achieve freedom from the cycle of reincarnation.

Vedic rituals cemented caste hierarchies, the remnants of which still structure Indian society today.

Yoga has become popularized as a fitness practice throughout the world, but the Westernization of this concept has emptied it of much of its original content.
Yoga is the mental process through which an individual soul joins with the supreme soul.
The teachings of the sage Patanjali, who lived circa 400 BCE, regarding ancient Yoga traditions and beliefs were compiled into approximately 200 Yoga sutras. The purpose of Yoga is the stopping of the movement of thought.

Yoga involves eight limbs. The first involves the observance of the yamas, moral restraints that keep individuals from being violent, lying, stealing, hoarding, and squandering vital energies (often interpreted as a practice of celibacy).
The second limb consists of personal codes of conduct, known as the niyamas - purity, discipline, self-study, contentment.
The third and fourth are breath control. The fifth and sixth limbs involve the mastering of the senses needed to achieve a peaceful mind and focus, the ability to concentrate deeply on the thing - a mental image, a word, or a spot on the wall.
The seventh limb involves meditation, which allows one to reach the eight limb - the self and true reality, the supreme soul.

During the Upanishadic period, 900-200 BCE, Yoga was incorporated into the new philosophic traditions that gave rise to Jainism and Buddhism.

3.3 Classical Chinese Philosophy
    - Early Chinese Philosophical Thought prior to Confucius

Magical and mystical thinking of this early period was connected to scientific and philosophical thought.
The connections between human virtues, the planets, and the material elements
provided some rational basis for belief in spiritual and magical forces.

Writings from this period also show the beginnings of the theory of yin and yang, the two fundamental forces
that are characterized as male and female, or dark and light, or inactivity and activity.

Another key concern of early Chinese texts is distinguishing between identity and harmony, where harmony is
understood to produce new things, while identity does not.

    - Confucianism
Confucius 551-479 BCE a philosophy that has influenced society, politics,
and culture in East Asia for more than 2,000 years.

Though Confucius was labeled an atheist and considered an innovator, he was in other ways culturally
conservative. He believed in a well-ordered society where rules and guidance come from the very top (the
emperor or “the heavens,” as it may be). Scholars today identify Confucianism as a form of virtue ethics
because it is an approach to ethics that focuses on personal virtue or character.

    - Daoism
The dao as a philosophical concept or a school of philosophical thought is associated primarily with the texts
the Daodejing, commonly attributed to Laozi or the “Old Master,” and the Zhuangzi, attributed to Zhuangzi (c.
fourth century BCE). Many contemporary scholars question whether Laozi actually existed. It is likely that both
texts are collections of writings from a variety of thinkers who belonged to a common school known as
Daoism. Daoism is a belief system developed in ancient China that encourages the practice of living in
accordance with the dao, the natural way of the universe and all things. Daoism is associated with a
countercultural religious movement in ancient China, contrary to the dominant, traditionalist Confucianism.

    - Mohism
The school of Mohism is named after the philosopher Mozi (c. 470–391 BCE), who lived immediately after
Confucius and was critical of the Confucian school. Less is known about Mozi than Confucius because even the
earliest Chinese histories relegated him to relative obscurity. He appears to have been a tradesman who was
skilled in his craft and slowly rose through the ranks of civil society. He was trained in Confucianism but
resisted the way Confucius was overly wedded to ritual and hierarchy. Mozi was a universalist, insisting on the
equal value of all people, without preferential treatment for family, neighbors, and country. He was followed
enthusiastically by his disciples, many of them tradespeople who found solace in his egalitarian approach to
philosophical questions.

4. The Emergence of Classical Philosophy
========================================
Scholars long regarded ancient Greece as the birthplace of Western philosophy. After all, the
word philosophy itself derives from the ancient Greek words philos (affection) and sophos (wisdom)—and
indeed, ancient Greece produced the great minds of Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle.

4.1 Historiography and the history of philosophy

Why should one study the
history of philosophy? And how should one study the history of philosophy? In response to the first question,
the history of philosophy has both intrinsic and instrumental value. It can give us a more accurate
understanding of our philosophical past while also informing contemporary approaches to philosophy.
Historical authors provide a source of arguments, ideas, and theories that inform contemporary debates.
Historical writings may inspire us. Finally, understanding the process by which philosophical ideas have
developed can help contemporary philosophers better understand the debates and ideas that are important to
them. In response to the second question: How should one study the history of philosophy? We may
distinguish, broadly, between three main approaches to the history of philosophy—the presentist approach,
the contextualist approach, and the hermeneutic approach.

4.2 Classical Philosophy
    - Egyptian Origins of Classical Philosophy
The understanding that the roots of classical thought lie, at least in part, in Egypt is as old as the ancient Greeks themselves.

Pythagoras 570-495 BCE studied mathematics in Heliopolis for more that two decades.


    -- Egyptian and Babylonian Mathematics
A Babylonian clay tablet dating to approximately 1800 BCE, known as Plimpton 322, demonstrates that the Babylonians had knowledge not only the relationship of the sides and hypotenuses of a right triangle but also of trigonometric functions.

    -- Akhenaten Metaphysics
In the mid 14th century BCE, Akhenaten became pharaoh in Egypt. He established Aten, the sun god, as the one true god.
Akhenaten held that solar energy was the element out of which all other elements evolved or emanated.

    - Ancient Greek Philosophy
Classical philosophy emerged in ancient Greece, following a procession from what are known as the
Presocratics; to the three great philosophers, Socrates (470–399 BCE), Plato (c. 428–347 BCE), and Aristotle
(384–322 BCE); and then to later schools of thought, including the Epicureans and Stoics.

    -- The Presocratics
The term Presocratics is somewhat problematic. At least a few of the thinkers considered part of this school
were contemporaries of Socrates and are mentioned in Plato’s dialogues.

The fragments of the works of these early philosophers that have come down to us focus on metaphysical
questions. One of the central debates among the Presocratics is between monism and plurism. Those who
think nature consisted of a single substance are called monists, in contrast to pluralists, who see it as
consisting of multiple substances. For example, the monist Thales of Miletus thought that the basic element
that comprised everything was water, while Empedocles the pluralist sought to show that there were four basic
elements (earth, air, fire, and water) that were resolved and dissolved by the competing forces of love and strife.

    --- Prominent Monists
Presocratic philosophers who sought to present a unified conception of nature held that nature ultimately
consists of a single substance. This proposition can be interpreted in various ways. The claim proposed by
Thales of Miletus (620–546 BCE) that the basic substance of the universe was water is somewhat ambiguous. It
might mean that everything is ultimately made of water, or it might mean that water is the origin of all things.
Thales and two of his students, Anaximander and Anaximenes, made up the monist Milesian school.
Anaximander thought that water was too specific to be the basis for everything that exists. Instead, he thought
the basic stuff of the universe was the apeiron, the indefinite or boundless. Anaximenes held that air was the
basic substance of the universe.

Zeno proposed paradoxes, known as Zeno’s paradoxes, that demonstrate that what we think of as plurality
and motion are simply not possible. Say, for example, that you wish to walk from the library to the park. To get
there, you first must walk halfway there. To finish your trip, you must walk half of the remaining distance (one
quarter). To travel that final quarter of the distance, you must first walk half of that (an eighth of the total
distance). This process can continue forever—creating an infinite number of discrete distances that you must
travel. It is therefore impossible that you arrive at the park. A more common way to present this paradox today
is as a mathematical asymptote or limit

    --- Prominent Pluralists
Parmenides and Heraclitus (525–475 BCE) held diametrically opposed views concerning the nature of the
universe. Where Parmenides saw unity, Heraclitus saw diversity. Heraclitus held that nothing remains the
same and that all is in flux. One of his most well-known sayings illustrates this well: “[It is not possible to step
twice into the same river]. . . . It scatters and again comes together, and approaches and recedes” (quoted in
Curd 2011, 45).
Anaxagoras (500–428 BCE) and Empedocles (494–434 BCE) were substance pluralists who believed that the
universe consisted of more than one basic kind of “stuff.” Anaxagoras believed that it is mind, or nous, that
controls the universe by mixing and unmixing things into a variety of different combinations. Empedocles held
that there were four basic substances (the four elements of air, earth, fire, and water) that were combined and
recombined by the opposing forces of love and strife.

    --- Presocratic Theology
The Presocratic philosopher Pythagoras (570–490 BCE) and his followers, known as the Pythagoreans,
comprised a rational yet mystical sect of learned men. The Pythagoreans had a reputation for learning and
were legendary for their knowledge of mathematics, music, and astronomy as well as for their dietary practices
and other customs (Curd 2011). Like Socrates, Pythagoras wrote nothing, so scholars continue to debate which
ideas originated with Pythagoras and which were devised by his disciples.

    - Socrates and Plato
As Socrates never wrote anything, he is remembered today because thinkers like Plato featured him in their writings.

Gradually, Plato has Socrates give voice to more positive doctrines. These include what comes to be known as
the theory of the forms, a metaphysical doctrine that holds that every particular thing that exists participates
in an immaterial form or essence that gives this thing its identity. The invisible realm of the forms differs
fundamentally from the changing realm we experience in this world.

The philosopher’s task is to access the immaterial realm of the forms and try to convince others of its truth.
Plato further believed that if we understand the true nature of virtues like wisdom, justice, and courage, we
cannot avoid acting in accordance with them. Hence, rulers of states should be philosopher-kings who have
the clearest understanding of forms.

    - Aristotle
During the Middle Ages, people referred to Plato’s most famous pupil Aristotle as simply “the Philosopher.”
This nickname is a testament to his enduring fame, as well as to the fact that he was driven by philosophical
curiosity to try to understand everything under the sun. The first sentence of his famous work Metaphysics
states, “Philosophy begins in wonder.”
His works ranged widely across
all the main areas of philosophy, including logic, metaphysics, and ethics. In addition, he investigated natural
philosophy, the fields of study that eventually gave rise to science. Aristotle also researched topics that would
today be classified as biology and physics. Stylistically, his work was very different from that of his teacher.
While Plato’s work was literary and even dramatic, Aristotle’s writings are presented as lecture.

Plato and his successors were prone to mysticism. It was easy to translate the philosophical theory of the forms
into a mystical doctrine in which the forms were known by the mind of God. Aristotle resisted this trend. At the
center of Aristotle’s work was his doctrine of the four causes. He believed that the nature of any single thing
could be understood by answering four basic questions: “What’s it made of?” (material cause), “What shape
does it have?” (formal cause), “What agent gave it this form?” (efficient cause), and, finally, “What is its end
goal?” (final cause).

In addition to the doctrine of the four causes, it is important to understand Aristotle’s account of the soul.
Unlike Plato, who held that the soul is an eternal substance that is reborn in various bodies, Aristotle has a
functional conception of the soul. He defined the soul based upon what the soul does. In Aristotle’s
understanding, all living things have souls. Plants have a vegetative soul that promotes growth and the
exchange of nutrients. The animal soul, in addition to taking in nutrients and growing, experiences the world,
desires things, and can move of its own volition. Added to these various functions in humans is the ability to
reason.

    - Epicureans
In the wake of the giants of Greek philosophy—Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle—some philosophers turned away
from Plato’s ideal forms and toward materialism.
The Epicureans steadfastly rejected the existence of immaterial forms, unmoved movers, and immaterial
souls. The Epicureans, like Aristotle, embraced empiricism, which means that they believed that all
knowledge was derived from sense experience.
The two principal Greek Epicureans were Epicurus himself (341–270 BCE) and his Roman disciple Lucretius
(c. 99–55 BCE). Although Epicurus’s views are characterized as hedonistic, this does not mean that he believed
that we ought to be indiscriminate pleasure-seekers.

    - Roman Philosophy

5. Logic and Reasoning
======================
Logic is arguably the most powerful tool, and certainly it gets the most use.
Logic, the study of reasoning, aims to formalize and describe reasoning processes used to arrive at claims.
Logic is study of both how we do reason and how we ought to reason.

5.1 Philosophical Methods for Discovering Truth
Like most academic disciplines, the goal of philosophy is to get closer to the truth.
Logic, reasoning, and argumentation are predominant methods used.
Philosophy is often known for its uncertainty because it focuses on questions for which we do not yet have ways of definitively answering.

Thinking like a philosopher involves thinking critically about alternative possibilities.

    - Dialectics and Philosophical Argumentation
Philosophers love to argue. Most people think of an argument as a verbal disagreement, and the term evokes images of raised voices, heightened emotions, and possibly bad behavior. In philosophy this word does not have a negative connotation.
An argument in philosophy is a reasoned position - to argue is simply to offer a set of reasons in support of some conclusion.
The long-term goal of argumentation between philosophers is to get closer to the truth.

A traditional dialectic is a debate or discussion between at least two people who hold differing views.
Dialectics make use of logic and reason, while debates often use rhetorical ploys or appeal to the emotions.

Dialectics usually start with a question. An interlocutor offers an answer to the question, which is then scrutinized by all participants.

    -- Indian Dialectics and Debate
Dialectics played an important role in early Indian philosophy.
Buddhist philosophical texts that were part of early Indian philosophy also contain narrative dialogues.

Analogical Argument Form
    1. X has property P.
    2. Y has property P and property S.
    3. Therefore, X has property S because it has property P
As you will see later in the section on deductive argumentation, relying on argumentative structure is a feature
of logical reasoning.

    -- Greek Dialectics and Debate
Socrates, perhaps the most famous
ancient Greek philosopher, claimed that knowledge is true opinion backed by argument.

If any ancient Greek philosopher most embodies the tie between dialectic and logic, it is Aristotle (c. 384–322
BCE), who was a student of Plato. Aristotle wrote books on the art of dialectic (Smith 2020). And he probably
participated in gymnastic dialectic—a structured dialectic contest practiced in the Academy (the school
founded by Plato, which Aristotle attended). But more importantly, Aristotle created a complex system of logic
upon which skill in the art of dialectic relied. Aristotle’s logic is the earliest formal systematized account of
inference we know of and was considered the most accurate and complete system until the late 19th century
(Smith 2020). Aristotle’s system is taught in logic classes to this day.

    - The Use of Reason to Discover Truth
Reasoning allows us to hypothesize, run thought experiments, access the coherence of a set of beliefs, and generate plausible explanations of the world around us.
The rules of logic are like the rules of math.
Logic supplies means by which to derive better answers - answers that are more likely to be true.
Because logic is the study of proper reasoning, and proper reasoning is an essential tools for discovering truth, logic is foundational to the pursuit of learning.

    - Testing Hypotheses
A hypothesis is a proposed explanation for an observed process or phenomenon.
Human beings formulate hypotheses because they wish to answer specific questions about the world.

We must use logic to test the truth of our supposition.
Reasoning is also used to assess the evidence collected for testing and to determine whether the test itself is good enough for drawing a reliable conclusion.

    - Laws of Logic
Logic, like the sciences, has laws.
Logic laws are rules that underlie thinking itself.

    -- Noncontradiction
A statement is a sentence with truth value, meaning that the statement must be true or false.
Negation of a statement is the denial of that statement.
Contradiction is the conjunction of any statement and its negation.
We may also say that any statement and its opposite are contradictory.

The law of noncontradiction is a law about truth, stating that contradictory propositions cannot be true in the same sense, at the same time.

Aristotle thought that the law of noncontradiction was the most certain of all principles because it is impossible for someone to believe that the same thing both is and is not.

    - The Excluded Middle
The law of the excluded middle is related to the law of noncontradiction.
The law of the excluded middle states that for any statement, either that statement is true, or its negation is true.

    - Normativity in Logic
Since we generally believe that inconsistency is reasoning is something that ought to be avoided, we can say that logic is normative.
Normativity is the assumption that certain actions, beliefs, or other mental states are good and ought to be pursued or realized. Normativity implies a standard (a norm) to which we ought to conform. Ethics is a normative discipline because it is the study of how we ought to act. And because we believe people ought to be logical rather than illogical, we label logic as normative.
While ethics is normative in the realm of actions and behavior, logic is normative in the realm of reasoning.
Some rules of thought, like the law of noncontrodiction, seem to be imperative (a command), so logic is a command of reasoning.

5.2 Logical Statements
Conditional expresses the logical relations between two propositions.

    - Conditionals
A condition is most commonly expressed as if then statement.
All conditionals include two components - that which follows the "if" and that which follows the "then".
    Statement 1: To do
    Statement 2: If sth then To do

Whatever follows "if" is called the antecedent (before). It is the first part of the conditional.
A consequent is a result, and in a conditional statement, it is the result of the antecedent (if the antecedent is true).

    - Necessary and Sufficient Conditions
All conditionals express two relations, or conditions: those that are necessary and those that are sufficient.
If something is sufficient, it is always sufficient for something else.
And if something is necessary, it is always necessary for something else.

    Y is a necessary condition for X if and only if X cannot be true without Y being true.

But notice that the necessary relation of a conditional does not automatically occur in the other direction.

Statement “if X, then Y” is not always symmetrical

    Y is always necessary for X, but X is not necessary for Y. On the other hand, X is always sufficient for Y.

X is a sufficient condition for Y if and only if the truth of X guarantees the truth of Y. Thus, if X is a sufficient condition for Y, then X automatically implies Y. But the reverse is not true. Oftentimes X is not the only way for something to be Y.

    -- Counterexamples
Counterexamples are important for testing the truth of propositions.

    - Universal Statements
Aristotle included universal affirmative statements in his system of logic, believing they were one of only a few types of meaningful logical statements (On Interpretation).

Universal affirmative statements take two groups of things and claim all
members of the first group are also members of the second group: “All A are B.”
These statements are called
universal and affirmative because they assert something about all members of group A.
This type of statement
is used when classifying objects and/or the relationships. Universal affirmative statements are, in fact, an
alternative expression of a conditional.

Universal statements are logically equivalent to conditionals, which means that any conditional can be
translated into a universal statement and vice versa. Notice that universal statements also express the logical
relations of necessity and sufficiency.

Because universal affirmative statements can always be rephrased as
conditionals (and vice versa), the ability to translate ordinary language statements into conditionals or
universal statements is helpful for understanding logical meaning.

    -- Counterexamples to Universal Statements
Universal affirmative statements also can be disproven using counterexamples. Take the belief that “All living
things deserve moral consideration.” If you wanted to prove this statement false, you would need to find just
one example of a living thing that you believe does not deserve moral consideration. Just one will suffice
because the categorical claim is quite strong—that all living things deserve moral consideration.

5.3 Arguments
An argument in philosophy is simply a set of reasons offered in support of some conclusion.

Arguments have two components: the conclusion and the reasons offered to support it. The conclusion is what
an arguer wants people to believe. The reasons offered are called premises.

    - Getting to the Premises
The first step in understanding an argument is to identify the conclusion.

Ask yourself what you think the main
point or main idea is. Can you identify a thesis? Sometimes identifying the conclusion may involve a little bit of
“mind reading.” You may have to ask yourself “What is this person trying to make me accept?” The arguer may
use words that indicate a conclusion—for example, “therefore” or “hence”

Then, identify the premises or evidence the
arguer offers in support of that conclusion. Once again, identifying reasons can be tricky and might involve
more mind reading because arguers don’t always explicitly state all of their reasons. Attempt to identify what
you think the arguer wants you to accept as evidence. Sometimes arguers also use words that indicate that
reasons or premises are being offered. In presenting evidence, people might use terms such as “because of” or
“since”

Conclusion indicator words and phrases:  therefore, hence, so, thus, consequently, accordingly, as a result, it follows that, it entails, that, we can conclude, for this reason, it must be that, it has to be that

Premise indicator words and phrases: given that, since, because, for, in that, for the reason that, in as much as, as indicated by, seeing how, seeing that, it follows from, owing to, it may be inferred from

    - The different between truth and logic
Analysis of arguments ought to take place on the levels of both truth and logic.
Truth analysis is the determination of whether statements are correct or accurate.
On the other hand, logical analysis ascertains whether the premises of an argument support the conclusion.

    -- Logical Analysis
Because logic is the study of reasoning, logical analysis involves assessing reasoning.
    -- Truth Analysis
If the logic in an argument seems good, you next turn to assessing the truth of the premises.

5.4 Types of Inferences
Inferences can be deductive, inductive, or abductive.
Deductive inferences are the strongest because they can guarantee the truth of their conclusions.
Inductive inferences the most widely used, but they do not guarantee the truth and instead deliver conclusions that are probably true.
Abductive inferences also deal in probability.

    - Deductive Reasoning

1. X or Y is true.
2. X is not true.
3. Therefore, Y is true.

    -- Valid Deductive Inferences
A good deductive inference is called a valid inference, meaning its structure guarantees the truth of its conclusion given the truth of the premises.
The definition does not say that valid arguments have true conclusions.
Validity is a property of the logical forms of arguments, and remember that logic and truth are distinct.
If the premises are true, then the conclusion must be true.

Disjunctive Syllogism:
1. X or Y.
2. Not Y.
3. Therefore X.

Modus Ponens:
1. If X, then Y.
2. X.
3. Therefore Y.

Modus Tollens:
1. If X, then Y.
2. Not Y.
3. Therefore, not X.

    -- Invalid Deductive Inferences

A bad deductive inference is called an invalid inference. In invalid inferences, their structure does not
guarantee the truth of the conclusion—that is to say, even if the premises are true, the conclusion may be false.
This does not mean that the conclusion must be false, but that we simply cannot know whether the conclusion
is true or false.

1. If it snows more than three inches, the schools are mandated to close.
2. The schools closed.
3. Therefore, it snowed more than three inches.

Affirming the Consequent:
1. If X, then Y.
2. Y.
3. Therefore, X.

Denying the Antecedent:
1. If X, then Y.
2. Not X.
3. Therefore, not Y.

    - Inductive Inferences
When we reason inductively, we gather evidence using our experience of the world and draw general conclusions based on that experience.
Inductive reasoning (induction) is also the process by which we use general beliefs we have about the world to create beliefs about our particular experiences or about what to expect in the future.

Because of the nature of experience and inductive inference, this method can never guarantee the truth of our
beliefs. At best, inductive inference generates only probable true conclusions because it goes beyond the
information contained in the premises.

While inductive inferences are not always a sure thing, they can still be quite reliable. In fact, a good deal of
what we think we know is known through induction. Moreover, while deductive reasoning can guarantee the
truth of conclusions if the premises are true, many times the premises themselves of deductive arguments are
inductively known. In studying philosophy, we need to get used to the possibility that our inductively derived
beliefs could be wrong.

There are several types of inductive inferences, but for the sake of brevity, this section will cover the three most
common types: reasoning from specific instances to generalities, reasoning from generalities to specific
instances, and reasoning from the past to the future.

    -- Reasoning from Specific Instances to Generalities
Perhaps I experience several instances of some phenomenon, and I notice that all instances share a similar
feature.

        Instance 1, Instance 2, Instance 3 . . . Instance n --> Generalization

Specific to General Inductive Argument Form:
1. Instance 1
2. Instance 2
3. Instance 3
4. General Conclusion

    -- Reasoning from Generalities to Specific Instances
Induction can work in the opposite direction as well: reasoning from accepted generalizations to specific instances.
The feature of induction relies on the fact that we are learners and that we learn from past experiences and from one another.
Much of what we learn is captured in generalizations.
You have probably accepted many generalizations from your parents, teachers, and peers.

Every cat I have ever petted doesn't tolerate its tail being pulled.
So this cat probably will not tolerate having its tail pulled.

“Where there is smoke, there is fire.”

    -- Reasoning from Past to Future
We often use inductive reasoning to predict what will happen in the future.
Reasoning from the past to the future is similar to reasoning from
specific instances to generalities.

    -- Strong Inductive Inferences
The strength of inductive inferences depends upon the reliability of premises given as evidence and their
relation to the conclusions drawn. A strong inductive inference is one where, if the evidence offered is true,
then the conclusion is probably true.
A weak inductive inference is one where, if the evidence offered is true,
the conclusion is not probably true. But just how strong an inference needs to be to be considered good is
context dependent. The word “probably” is vague.

    - Abductive Reasoning
Abductive reasoning is similar to inductive reasoning in that both forms of inference are probabilistic.
However, they differ in the relationship of the premises to the conclusion. In inductive argumentation, the
evidence in the premises is used to justify the conclusion. In abductive reasoning, the conclusion is meant to
explain the evidence offered in the premises. In induction the premises explain the conclusion, but in
abduction the conclusion explains the premises.

5.5 Informal Fallacies
When the form of an argument is problematic, it is called a formal fallacy.

There are many specific types of informal fallacies, but most can be sorted into four general categories
according to how the reasoning fails. These categories show how reasoning can go wrong and serve as
warnings for what to watch out for in arguments. They are (1) fallacies of relevance, (2) fallacies of weak
induction, (3) fallacies of unwarranted assumption, and (4) fallacies of diversion.

    - Fallacies of Relevance
In fallacies of relevance, the arguer presents evidence that is not relevant for logically establishing their conclusion.
The reason why fallacies of relevance stick around is because the evidence seems relevant - meaning it feels relevant.
Fallacies of relevance prey on our likes and dislikes.
Indeed, the very first fallacy of relevance is called "appeal to emotion".

    -- Appeal to Emotion
Emotional appeals can target any number of emotions from fear to pity and from love and compassion to hate and aversion.

    -- Ad Hominem Attacks
The ad hominem attack is most often committed by a person who is arguing against some other person's position.
"Ad hominem" in Latin means "toward the man".
The reasons they give for their conclusion concern the characteristics of the person they are arguing against rather than that person's position.
You may wonder why such arguments are effective and one reason is sloppy associative reasoning, wherein we problematically assume that characteristics held by an arguer will be transferred to their argument.
Another related reason is that too often we allow ourselves to be ruled by emotion rather than reason. If we are
made to feel negatively toward a person, those feelings can cloud assessment of their arguments.
There are other types of ad hominem attacks, and the most successful is probably the one called tu quoque,
which means “you too” in Latin. When someone commits a tu quoque ad hominem fallacy, they attempt to
undermine a person’s argument by pointing to real or perceived hypocrisy on the part of the person.

    - Fallacies of Weak Induction
The fallacies of weak induction are mistakes in reasoning in which a person’s evidence or reasons are too
weak to firmly establish a conclusion. The reasoner uses relevant premises, but the evidence contained
therein is weak or defective in some way. These errors are errors of induction. When we inductively reason, we
gather evidence using our experience in the world and draw conclusions based on that experience.

6. Metaphysics
==============
Defining metaphysics is difficult. On a summary level, one possible definition is that metaphysics is the field of philosophy concerned with identifying that which a real.

As you will discover, the topic of metaphysics is far-reaching and broaches many questions.
    • What is real?
    • What is being?
    • Is there a purpose to our being?
    • What is the self?
    • Is there a God?
    • Do human beings (however defined) possess free will?

6.1 Substance
    - Fundamentality: the One and the Many
How many real things exist, is the real one, or is it many?
    -- Monism
Monism is the belief that the most discrete or fundamental reality is singular.
    --- Thales of Miletus
Thales, the founder of this school of philosophy, says the permanent entity is water.
    -- Pluralism
Pluralism asserts that fundamental reality consists of many types of being.

    - Ontological Perspectives on Substance
Up until now, this chapter has examined substance from a materialistic perspective - the concrete substances (water, fire, atoms) that make up the physical world that we see around us.
The study of existence, of being, of what is real - a discipline known as ontology - is broader.
    -- Naturalism
Naturalism, in its simplest form, is the view that meaningful inquiry includes only the physical and the laws governing physical entities and rejects the priority placed on reason assumed within metaphysics.
Naturalists also weed out the assumptions, theories,
and questions that are introduced but are not capable of empirical proof.
    --- The allegory of the Cave
Plato offered his allegory of the cave, which depects prisoners who have mistaken shodows cast on the wall of the cave for real beings and therefore have mistaken illusion for truth.
    -- Plato Notion of Substance and Form
    -- Aristotle on Matter and Form
If forms did exist, he challenged, then how could forms influence things?
Aristotle explained substance through a composite of matter and form.
Form, much like an idea a sculptor has in mind, is the unchanging purpose of whatness informing each particular or individual instance.

6.2 Self and Identity
    - The ship of Theseus
    - Judeo Christian Views of Self
The self is a soul.
    - Hindu and Buddhist Views of Self
Atman is the term associated with the self.
    -- Brahman

    - Secular
    -- Bundle Theory
David Hume (1711-1776).
John Locke (1632-1704).

Substance is as a something I know not what.

    - The Mind as Self
Equated the self to the mind.
Yet, if the mind is the brain, a purely biological entity, then how do we explain consciousness?
    -- Physicalism
Reducing the mind to the brain seems intuitive given advances in neuroscience and other related sciences that
deepen our understanding of cognition. As a doctrine, physicalism is committed to the assumption that
everything is physical. Exactly how to define the physical is a matter of contention. Driving this view is the
assertion that nothing that is nonphysical has physical effects.

    -- Behaviorism
There is a response that rejects the idea of an independent mind. Within this approach, what is important is
not mental states or the existence of a mind as a sort of central processor, but activity that can be translated
into statements concerning observable behavior (

6.3 Cosmology and the Existence of God
Cosmology is the study of how reality is ordered.
    - Teleological Arguments for God
Teleological arguments consider the level of design found in living
organisms, the order displayed on a cosmological scale, and even how the presence of order in general is
significant.
    - Moral Arguments for God
    - The Ontological Argument for God.

6.4 Free Will
    - Defining Freedom
    -- The Ability to Do Otherwise
A moral agent is free if and only if the moral agent could have done otherwise.

PAP: Principle of Alternative Possibilities.

    - Libertarianism
A libertarian believes that actions are free—that is, not caused by external forces. We are free to plot our
course through our actions. Existentialists further argue that our essence is the product of our choices.

    - Determinism
The contrary view to metaphysical libertarianism is determinism. The determinist holds that human moral
agents are not free from external forces. Our actions could not have been otherwise. Thus, action X at time T
must occur.


7. Epistemology
===============
What is knowledge? Is there a limit to what we can know? How can we increase our knowledge without
first understanding what knowledge is? Epistemology is the field within philosophy that focuses on questions
pertaining to the nature and extent of human knowledge. This chapter seeks to provide a general
understanding of the discipline of epistemology.

7.1 What Epistemology Studies
The word epistemology is derived from the Greek words episteme, meaning “knowledge,” and logos, meaning
“explanation” and translated in suffix form (-logia) as “the study of.” Hence, epistemology is the study of
knowledge. Epistemology focuses on what knowledge is as well as what types of knowledge there are. Because
knowledge is a complex concept, epistemology also includes the study of the possibility of justification, the
sources and nature of justification, the sources of beliefs, and the nature of truth.

    - How to do epistemology
Epistemology begins with the philosophical method of doubting and asking questions.

    - The Normative Nature of Epistemology
Normativity is the assumption that certain actions, beliefs, or other mental states are good and ought to be pursued or realized.

    - Preliminary Look at Knowledge
Knowledge enjoys a special status among beliefs and mental states.
Knowledge is more than just truth.
    -- Ways of Knowing
The distinction between a priori knowledge and a posteriori knowledge reveals something important about the possible ways a person can gain knowledge.
A priori knowledge is knowledge that can be gained using reason alone.
The acquisition of a priori knowledge does not depend on experience.
Knowledge that exists before experience (prior in time) is innate knowledge, or knowledge that one is somehow born with.

A posteriori knowledge is knowledge that can only be gained through experience.
It is empirical.
Empirical knowledge is knowledge gained from sense perception.

    - Thing You Can Know: Types of Knowledge
Philosophers classify knowledge not only by source but also by type.
Propositional knowledge is knowledge of propositions of statements.
A proposition or statement is a declarative sentence with a truth value - that is, a sentence that is either true of false.

Procedure knowledge is best understood as know-how.
Procedure knowledge involves the ability to perform some task successfully.

Knowledge by acquaintance is knowledge gained from direct experience.

    - Truth
People are sometimes tempted to believe that truth is relative.

7.2 Knowledge
    - Plato and the Traditional Account of Knowledge

1. P is true,
2. S believes P, and
3. S is justified in believing P

    - Problems with the Traditional Account of Knowledge
    -- Russell Case
"Even a broken clock is right twice a day".

7.3 Justification
Questions about what knowledge is often boil down to questions about justification.
    - The Nature of Justification

7.4 Skepticism
Philosophical skepticism is the view that some or all knowledge is impossible.
A global skeptic rejects the possibility of knowledge in general.
A logical skeptic questions the possibility of knowledge only in particular areas of study.

7.5 Applied Epistemology

8. Value Theory
===============
Value theory is the philosophical investigation of values.
In its narrow sense, it refers to ethical concerns.

8.5 Aesthetics
Aesthetics is an area of value theory that examines how people evaluate works of art and other aesthetic experiences in nature and their everyday lives.

    - Beauty
A central concept is aesthetics is beauty.
Is beauty an objective or subjective value?
    -- Objective Concepts of Beauty
Plato and Aristotle: beauty is a quality of an object.
Plato: there is one true "form" or essence of the beautiful that explains why individual things are beautiful.
The beautiful itself has to do with harmony, proportion, and balance.
The ancient Greeks used mathematical ratios to determine the perfect proportions for their temples and sculptures.

    -- Subjective Concepts of Beauty
Aristotle argued that beauty is a subjective judgment.
Judgments of beauty are statements of taste.

    - Aesthetic Judgment
Aesthetic theory also examines how people make judgments about art.

9. Normative Moral Theory
=========================
Normative ethics focuses on establishing norms and standards of moral conduct for effectively guiding our behavior.

9.1 Requirements of a Normative Moral Theory
    - Three Areas of Ethics
Ethics is the field of philosophy that investigates morality.

10. Applied Ethics
==================
11. Political Philosophy
========================

Totalitarianism is a system of government that exercises complete control over its population in both personal and public life by eliminating free press and imposing censorship and mass surveillance, along with other social controls.
In a totaliarian system, opposition to the state is prohibited, and repercussions for disobedience are generally severe.

Autocracy when power is concentrated in the hands of an individual, through a dictatorship under a single leader.

12. Contemporary Philosophies and Social Theories
=================================================

