6th Tanenbaum
Computer networks
=================

18th century:   industrial revolution
19th            Steam engine
20th            information gathering/processing/distribution => Internet

Computer networks = a collection of interconnected, autonomous computing devices.

Client-server model, where a client explicitly requests information from a server
that hosts that information.

Client machine    --- request -->    Server machine
 (process)        <-- response --      process


peer-to-peer model

Instant messaging

Electronic commerce:
B2C = business to consumer
B2B = business to business
G2C = government to consumer
P2P = peer to peer

Entertainment

Internet of Things (IoT)

802.11 hotspot

RFID = scan the barcodes

Smartphone => SMS (text messaging, texting).

GPS: geo-tagging

NFC = payment


1.2.3
Content Provider Networks
-------------------------
Many Internet services are now served from "the cloud", or data-center network.
Modern data center networks have hundreds of thousands of millions of servers in
a single location, usually in a very dense configuration of rows of racks in
buildings that can be more than a kilometer long.

1.2.4
Transit Network
---------------
ISP
backbone networks

1.2.5
Enterprise Networks
-------------------
VPN, email, VoIP

1.3 Network technology
----------------------
PAN (personal area networks) => Bluetooth
LAN (local area networks) => AP, wireless router, base station

wireless, copper, coaxial cable, optical fiber.
IEEE 802.11 - Wi-Fi
IEEE 802.3    Ethernet

Waves can travel through walls (2.4 GHz, less 5 GHz).

MAN (metropolitan LAN) covers a city.
IEEE 802.16 WiMAX
LTE (Long Term Evolution) and 5G

WAN (Wide LAN)

Internetworks
-------------
The device that makes a connection between two or more networks and provides the
necessary translation => gateway.



The ARPANET
-----------
The story begins in the late 1950s.
At the height of the Cold War, the U.S. DoD wanted a command-and-control network
that could survive a nuclear war.

Digital packet switching technology.

ARPA = Advanced Research Projects Agency.

TCP/IP, sockets Berkeley UNIX


Network protocol
================
Central concept in network protocol design is layering.

Reliability = the ability to recover from errors, faults or failures.
Resource allocation = sharing access to a common, limited resource.
Evolvability = allowing for incremental deployment of protocol improvements over time
Security = defending the network against various types of attacks

Reliability is the design issue of making a network that operates correctly even
though it is comprised of components that are themselves unreliable.
There is a chance that some of these bits of a packet travelling damaged (inverted).
due to fluke electrical noise, random wireless signals, hardware flaws, software bugs,
and so on.
One mechanism for finding errors in received information uses codes for error detection.
More powerful codes allows for error correction (recovered).
Another reliability issues is finding a working path through a network.
Often, there are multiple paths between a source and destination, and in a large network,
there may be some links or routers that are broken. This topic is called routing.

Resource allocation.
Cities can have traffic jams, a shortage of telephone numbers, and it is easy to get lost.
Designs that continue to work well when the network gets large are said to be scalable.
This design is called statistical multiplexing, meaning sharing based on the statistics of
demand.
How to keep a fast sender from swamping a slow receiver with data. Feedback from the receiver
to the sender is often used. This subject is called flow control. This overloading of the
network is called congestion. One strategy is for each computer to reduce its demand for
resources (e.g., bandwidth).
For uses such as carrying live video, the timeliness of delivery matters a great deal.
Real-time delivery at the same time that they provide service to applications that want
high throughput. Quality of service (QoS) is the name given to mechanisms that
reconcile these competing demands.

Evolvability
............
We have recently seen the key structuring mechanism used to support change by dividing
the overall problem and hiding implementation details: protocol layering.
Since there are many computers on the network, every layer needs a mechanism for
identifying the senders and receivers that are involved in a particular message.
This is called addressing and naming.

Security
........
Confidentiality
Authentication prevent someone from impersonating someone else.
Integrity prevent surreptitious changes to messages.

=> these designs are based on cryptography.


1.5.2
Protocol Layering
.................
Most networks are organized as a stack of layers of levels, each on built up one below it.
The purpose of each layer is to offer certain services to the higher layer while
shielding those layers from the details of how the offered services are actually implemented.
Information hiding, abstract data types, data encapsulation and OOP.
Protocol is an agreement between the communicating parties on how communication is to proceed.
Peer to peer.
Layers, protocol and interface.
Ln -- protocol -- Ln
Ln - interface - Ln-1

Below layer 1 is the physical medium through which actual communication occurs.
Interface defines which primitive operations and services the low layer makes
available to the upper one.

A set of layers and protocols is called a network architecture.
A list of the protocols used by a certain system, one protocol per layer, is called protocol stack.

1.5.3
Connections and reliability
...........................
 - connection oriented
 - connectionless
They may also offer various levels of reliability

Connection oriented service is modeled after the telephone system.
Establish a connection.
Release connection.
Negotiation about the parameters to be used, such as maximum messages size, QoS and other issues.
One side makes a proposal and the other side can accept it, reject it, or make counterproprosal.

Connectionless service is modeled after the postal system.
Each message (letter) carries the full destination address, and each one is routed through the intermediate
nodes inside the system independent of all the seqsequent messages.
Packet is a message at the network layer.
Unreliable connectionless service is often called datagram service.

Reliability.
...........
A reliable service is implemented by having the receiver acknowledge the receipt of each
message so the sender is sure that it arrived.
The acknowledgement process introduces overhead and delays.

Message sequences and byte streams.

Ethernet does not provide reliable communication.
In some applications, the transmit delays introduced by acknowledgements are unacceptable.
One such application is digitized voice traffic (VoIP).

Still another service is the request - reply service. Client - server model.

1.5.4
Service Primitives
..................
A service is formally specified by a set of primitives (operations) available to
user processes to access the service.

Berkeley sockets:
        request - reply interaction in a client - server environment.

Datagrams:
        Server: executes LISTEN prepare to accept incoming connections
        Client:          CONNECT
        Server:          ACCEPT
                 Request - reply
                         DISCONNECT
RECEIVE - SEND

1.5.5
The relationship of Services to Protocols
.........................................
Services and protocols are distinct concepts.
Services is a set of primitives that a layer provides to the layer above it.
A protocol is a set of rules governing the formal and meaning of the packets.

1.6
Reference Models
...............
Two prevailing models are:
        TCP/IP
        OSI

1.6.1 OSI
.........
ISO = International Standard Organization, 1995

L7      Application             APDU
L6      Presentation            PPDU
L5      Session                 SPDU
L4      Transport               TPDU
L3      Network                 Packet
L2      Data Link               Frame
L1      Physical                Bit

1.6.2
.....
TCP/IP

ARPANET => TCP/IP, 1974

Link            Layer = choice packet switching network based on a connectionless layer.        L2      Ethernet, 802.11, DSL, SONET
Internet        Layer =                                                                         L3      IP (Internet Protocol) + ICMP (control message)
Transport       Layer =                                                                         L4      TCP (Transmission Control) + UDP (user datagram)
Application     Layer =                                                                         L7      HTTP, SMTP, RTP, DNS

Application include any session and presentation function that they require.


2.
THE PHYSICAL LAYER
==================
It defines
        electrical
        timing
        other interfaces by which bits are send as signals over channels.

Performance: throughput, latency, error rate

Transmission media:
        guided or wired (copper, coaxial cable, fiber optics)
        wireless (terrestrial radio)
        satellite

2.1
Guided transmission media
.........................
The purpose of the physical layer is to transport bits from one machine to another.
Transmissions are guided along a path with a physical cable or wire.

Bandwidth is a measure of the carrying capacity of a medium. In Hz.

2.1.2
Twisted Pairs
.............
Consists of two insulated copper wires, typically about 1 mm thick.
A signal is usually carried as the difference in voltage between the two wires
in the pair.

=> telephone system

Twisted pairs can run several kilometers without apmlification.
Transmitted either analog or digital information.

The bandwidth depends on the thickness of the wire and the distance traveled,
but hundreds of mbps can be achieved for a few kilometers.
Low cost.

Category 5e cabling: 4 twisted pairs

100 mbps Ethernet uses two pairs, one pair for each direction.
1 gbps uses all four pairs in both directions simultaneously.
Full duplex links. Half duplex links.

<= Cat 6: UTP (unshielded twisted pair) - only wires and insulators.
   Cat 7: shielding on the individual pairs.

2.1.3
Coaxial Cable
............
coax
It has better shielding and greater bandwidth than unshielded twisted pairs.
It can span longer distances at higher speed.
        50 Ohm cable for digital transmission
        75 Ohm cable for analog transmission and television

Consists:
        stiff copper wire as the core
        surrounded by an insulating material
        
Copper core => Insulating material => Braided outer conductor => protective plastic covering

Up to 6 GHz

2.1.4
Power Lines
...........
Electrical power lines.

2.1.5
Fiber Optics
............
Fiber optics are used for long haul transmission in the network backbones, high speed LAN

The light source, the transmission medium and the detector
Transmission medium is an ultra thin fiber of glass.

