People skills magic
===================

Chapter 1
Using people skills
Adequately can change your life

The methods taught here boil down to simple, easy ways of dealing fairly and
properly with your fellow human beings. And they bolster the self - esteem(+es)
of others and make them feel good about themselves.

Few people because of their inherent use these people skills to an adequate extent.

It could change your life. If you can discipline yourself to consistently utilize
the people skills taught here.

Chapter 2
Fundamental realities

We need to accept the self - importance or self - value that is build - in the
character of most of us. Of course, the degree of it varies in persons.

You must meet the needs of people to feel good about themselves.
How others view themselves after contacts with you is critical !!!
(And as strange as it might seem, this does not depend on how they regard you in
the usual way of analyzing persons).

It does not determine how people truly feel about you. What controls that is how
they evaluate you subliminally.
And this depends on how you make them feel about themselves after contact with
you. Your relations with these people must increase or improve their self -
importance or self - images.

Chapter 3.
Showing interest.

Need only genuine interest.

How to become interested: find a way to become curious about her or him.

People easily detect shallow, casual interest and can brush you off.
Simply pursuing the inquiries again, but in different ways.

Need to find something that both you and she enjoy or have an interest in.
And sometimes it is normal that they don't think ask anything in return.
(If they would reflect on it, they'd likely be ashamed. Don't fret too much,
these people will not change).

To prepare yourself for a contact with her you could ask yourself: What's is
about? What else should I ask her? Prepare, prepare, and prepare!

Chapter 4
Make someone's day

Some don't compliment because they're envious.
Another emotion that keeps people from compliment is jealousy.
Another reason people don't compliment is that their self - esteem are at low ebb.
Or it remind them that they don't have what you have. And that bothers them.

 => That are the irrational motivations of persons who fail to compliment
 because of their inability to accept reality.
 
Some people don't compliment when they should, because they don't always notice things.
The remedy: You must notice new clothes, hairstyles, new things, ...
And some people is just plain shy.

Need to say that you not just like something but also need to tell why you do.
Why details are importance, because they believe you, and not think you're just
buttering her up.

!!! Sometimes, what seems like a compliment is not. It can convey two messages,
one complimentary and the other derogatory.


Chapter 5
Listen Well.
Respond Well.

Better ways exist to show interest in people than to listen and respond well to
what they say (evidence that you consider them important, you approciate and
respect them).

















