
1
1:1 In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth. 2 The earth
was a vast waste, darkness covered the deep, and the spirit of God hovered over
the surface of the water. 3 God said, ‘ Let there be light,’ and there was
light; 4 and God saw the light was good, and he separated light from darkness.
5 He called the light day, and the darkness night. So evening came, and morning
came; it was the first day.
1:6 God said, ‘ Let there be a vault between the waters, to separate water
from water.’ 7 So God made the vault, and separated the water under the vault
from the water above it, and so it was; 8 and God called the vault the heavens.
Evening came, and morning came, the second day.
1:9 God said, ‘ Let the water under the heavens be gathered into one
place, so that dry land may appear’; and so it was. 10 God called the dry land
earth, and the gathering of the water he called sea; and God saw that it was
good. 11 Then God said, ‘ Let the earth produce growing things; let there be on
the earth plants that bear seed, and trees bearing fruit each with its own kind
of seed.’ So it was; 12 the earth produced growing things: plants bearing their
own kind of seed and trees bearing fruit, each with its own kind of seed; and
God saw that it was good. 13 Evening came, and morning came, the third day.
1:14 God said, ‘ Let there be lights in the vault of the heavens to
separate day from night, and let them serve as signs both for festivals and for
seasons and years. 15 Let them also shine in the heavens to give light on
earth.’ So it was; 16 God made two great lights, the greater to govern the day
and the lesser to govern the night; he also made the stars. 17 God put these
lights in the vault of the heavens to give light on earth, 18 to govern day and
night, and to separate light from darkness; and God saw that it was good. 19
Evening came, and morning came, the fourth day.
1:20 God said, ‘ Let the water teem with living creatures, and let birds
fly above the earth across the vault of the heavens.’ 21 God then created the
great sea-beasts and all living creatures that move and swarm in the water,
according to their various kinds, and every kind of bird; and God saw that it
was good. 22 He blessed them and said, ‘ Be fruitful and increase; fill the
water of the sea, and let the birds increase on the land.’ 23 Evening came, and
morning came, the fifth day.
1:24 God said, ‘ Let the earth bring forth living creatures, according to
their various kinds: cattle, creeping things, and wild animals, all according to
their various kinds.’ So it was; 25 God made wild animals, cattle, and every
creeping thing, all according to their various kinds; and he saw that it was
good. 26 Then God said, ‘ Let us make human beings in our image, after our
likeness, to have dominion over the fish in the sea, the birds of the air, the
cattle, all wild animals on land, and everything that creeps on the earth.’ 27
God created human beings in his own image; in the image of God he created them;
male and female he created them. 28 God blessed them and said to them, ‘ Be
fruitful and increase, fill the earth and subdue it, have dominion over the fish
in the sea, the birds of the air, and every living thing that moves on the
earth.’ 29 God also said, ‘ Throughout the earth I give you all plants that bear
seed, and every tree that bears fruit with seed: they shall be yours for food.
30 All green plants I give for food to the wild animals, to all the birds of the
air, and to everything that creeps on the earth, every living creature.’ So it
was; 31 and God saw all that he had made, and it was very good. Evening came,
and morning came, the sixth day.

2:1 Thus the heavens and the earth and everything in them were completed.
2 On the sixth day God brought to an end all the work he had been doing; on the

seventh day, having finished all his work, 3 God blessed the day and made it
holy, because it was the day he finished all his work of creation. 4 This is
the story of the heavens and the earth after their creation.
 When the Lord God made the earth and the heavens, 5 there was neither shrub
nor plant growing on the earth, because the Lord God had sent no rain; nor was
there anyone to till the ground. 6 Moisture used to well up out of the earth
and water all the surface of the ground. 


2:7 The Lord God formed a human being from the dust of the ground and
breathed into his nostrils the breath of life, so that he became a living
creature. 8 The Lord God planted a garden in Eden away to the east, and in it
he put the man he had formed. 9 The Lord God made trees grow up from the
ground, every kind of tree pleasing to the eye and good for food; and in the
middle of the garden he set the tree of life and the tree of the knowledge of
good and evil. 

2:10 There was a river flowing from Eden to water the garden, and from
there it branched into four streams. 11 The name of the first is Pishon; it is
the river which skirts the whole land of Havilah, where gold is found. 12 The
gold of that land is good; gum resin and cornelians are also to be found there.
13 The name of the second river is Gihon; this is the one which skirts the whole
land of Cush. 14 The name of the third is Tigris; this is the river which flows
east of Asshur. The fourth river is the Euphrates.


2:15 The Lord God took the man and put him in the garden of Eden to till
it and look after it. 16 ‘ You may eat from any tree in the garden ’, he told the
man, 17 ‘ except from the tree of the knowledge of good and evil; the day you
eat from that, you are surely doomed to die.’ 18 Then the Lord God said, ‘ It is
not good for the man to be alone; I shall make a partner suited to him.’ 19 So
from the earth he formed all the wild animals and all the birds of the air, and
brought them to the man to see what he would call them; whatever the man called
each living creature, that would be its name. 20 The man gave names to all
cattle, to the birds of the air, and to every wild animal; but for the man
himself no suitable partner was found. 21 The Lord God then put the man into a
deep sleep and, while he slept, he took one of the man's ribs and closed up the
flesh over the place. 22 The rib he had taken out of the man the Lord God built
up into a woman, and he brought her to the man. 23 The man said: ‘ This one at
last is bone from my bones, flesh from my flesh! She shall be called woman, for
from man was she taken.’ 24 That is why a man leaves his father and mother and
attaches himself to his wife, and the two become one. 25 Both were naked, the
man and his wife, but they had no feeling of shame.

 3:1 The serpent, which was the most cunning of all the creatures the Lord
God had made, asked the woman, ‘ Is it true that God has forbidden you to eat
from any tree in the garden?’ 2 She replied, ‘ We may eat the fruit of any tree
in the garden, 3 except for the tree in the middle of the garden. God has
forbidden us to eat the fruit of that tree or even to touch it; if we do, we
shall die.’ 4 ‘ Of course you will not die,’ said the serpent; 5 ‘ for God knows
that, as soon as you eat it, your eyes will be opened and you will be like God
himself, knowing both good and evil.’ 6 The woman looked at the tree: the fruit
would be good to eat; it was pleasing to the eye and desirable for the knowledge
it could give. So she took some and ate it; she also gave some to her husband,
and he ate it. 7 Then the eyes of both of them were opened, and they knew that
they were naked; so they stitched fig-leaves together and made themselves
loincloths. 

The man and his wife heard the sound of the Lord God walking about in
the garden at the time of the evening breeze, and they hid from him among the
trees. 9 The Lord God called to the man, ‘ Where are you?’ 10 He replied, ‘ I
heard the sound of you in the garden and I was afraid because I was naked, so I
hid.’ 11 God said, ‘ Who told you that you were naked? Have you eaten from the
tree which I forbade you to eat from?’ 12 The man replied, ‘ It was the woman
you gave to be with me who gave me fruit from the tree, and I ate it.’ 13 The


Lord God said to the woman, ‘ What have you done?’ The woman answered, ‘ It was
the serpent who deceived me into eating it.’ 14 Then the Lord God said to the
serpent:
 ‘ Because you have done this you are cursed alone of all cattle and the
creatures of the wild. ‘ On your belly you will crawl, and dust you will eat all
the days of your life. 15 I shall put enmity between you and the woman, between
your brood and hers. They will strike at your head, and you will strike at their
heel.’ 16 To the woman he said: ‘ I shall give you great labour in childbearing;
with labour you will bear children. You will desire your husband, but he will be
your master.’ 17 And to the man he said: ‘ Because you have listened to your
wife and have eaten from the tree which I forbade you, on your account the earth
will be cursed. You will get your food from it only by labour all the days of
your life; 18 it will yield thorns and thistles for you. You will eat of the
produce of the field, 19 and only by the sweat of your brow will you win your
bread until you return to the earth; for from it you were taken. Dust you are,
to dust you will return.’ 20 The man named his wife Eve because she was the
mother of all living beings. 21 The Lord God made coverings from skins for the
man and his wife and clothed them. 22 But he said, ‘ The man has become like one
of us, knowing good and evil; what if he now reaches out and takes fruit from
the tree of life also, and eats it and lives for ever?’ 23 So the Lord God
banished him from the garden of Eden to till the ground from which he had been
taken. 24 When he drove him out, God settled him to the east of the garden of
Eden, and he stationed the cherubim and a sword whirling and flashing to guard
the way to the tree of life. 


4:1 The man lay with his wife Eve, and she conceived and gave birth to
Cain. She said, ‘ With the help of the Lord I have brought into being a male
child.’ 2 Afterwards she had another child, Abel. He tended the flock, and Cain
worked the land. 3 In due season Cain brought some of the fruits of the earth
as an offering to the Lord, 4 while Abel brought the choicest of the firstborn
of his flock. The Lord regarded Abel and his offering with favour, 5 but not
Cain and his offering. Cain was furious and he glowered. 6 The Lord said to
Cain, ‘ Why are you angry? Why are you scowling? 7 If you do well, you hold your
head up; if not, sin is a demon crouching at the door; it will desire you, and
you will be mastered by it.’ 8 Cain said to his brother Abel, ‘ Let us go out
into the country.’ Once there, Cain attacked and murdered his brother. 9 The
Lord asked Cain, ‘ Where is your brother Abel?’ ‘ I do not know,’ Cain answered.
‘ Am I my brother’s keeper?’ 10 The Lord said, ‘ What have you done? Your
brother's blood is crying out to me from the ground. 11 Now you are accursed
and will be banished from the very ground which has opened its mouth to receive
the blood you have shed. 12 When you till the ground, it will no longer yield
you its produce. You shall be a wanderer, a fugitive on the earth.’ 13 Cain
said to the Lord, ‘ My punishment is heavier than I can bear; 14 now you are
driving me off the land, and I must hide myself from your presence. I shall be a
wanderer, a fugitive on the earth, and I can be killed at sight by anyone.’ 15
The Lord answered him, ‘ No: if anyone kills Cain, sevenfold vengeance will be
exacted from him.’ The Lord put a mark on Cain, so that anyone happening to meet
him should not kill him. 16 Cain went out from the Lord's presence and settled
in the land of Nod to the east of Eden. 

4:17 Then Cain lay with his wife; and she conceived and gave birth to
Enoch. Cain was then building a town which he named Enoch after his son. 18
Enoch was the father of Irad, Irad of Mehujael, Mehujael of Methushael, and
Methushael of Lamech.

4:19 Lamech married two women, one named Adah, the other Zillah. 20 Adah
gave birth to Jabal, the ancestor of tent-dwellers who raise flocks and herds.
21 His brother’s name was Jubal; he was the ancestor of those who play the harp
and pipe. 22 Zillah, the other wife, bore Tubal-cain, the master of all
coppersmiths and blacksmiths, and Tubal-cain’s sister was Naamah. 23 Lamech
said to his wives: ‘ Adah and Zillah, listen to me; wives of Lamech, mark what I
say: I kill a man for wounding me, a young man for a blow. 24 If sevenfold
vengeance was to be exacted for Cain, for Lamech it would be seventy-sevenfold.’


25 Adam lay with his wife again. She gave birth to a son, and named him Seth,
‘ for ’, she said, ‘ God has granted me another son in place of Abel, because Cain
killed him ’. 26 Seth too had a son, whom he named Enosh. At that time people
began to invoke the Lord by name. 

This is the list of Adam's descendants. On the day when God created
human beings he made them in his own likeness. 2 He created them male and
female, and on the day when he created them, he blessed them and called them
man.

 5:3 Adam was one hundred and thirty years old when he begot a son in his
likeness and image, and named him Seth. 4 After the birth of Seth he lived
eight hundred years, and had other sons and daughters. 5 He lived nine hundred
and thirty years, and then he died.

 5:6 Seth was one hundred and five years old when he begot Enosh. 7 After
the birth of Enosh he lived eight hundred and seven years, and had other sons
and daughters. 8 He lived nine hundred and twelve years, and then he died. 


5:9 Enosh was ninety years old when he begot Kenan. 10 After the birth
of Kenan he lived eight hundred and fifteen years, and had other sons and
daughters. 11 He lived nine hundred and five years, and then he died.

5:12 Kenan was seventy years old when he begot Mahalalel. 13 After the
birth of Mahalalel he lived eight hundred and forty years, and had other sons
and daughters. 14 He lived nine hundred and ten years, and then he died. 

5:15 Mahalalel was sixty-five years old when he begot Jared. 16 After
the birth of Jared he lived eight hundred and thirty years, and had other sons
and daughters. 17 He lived eight hundred and ninety-five years, and then he
died. 

5:18 Jared was one hundred and sixty-two years old when he begot Enoch.
19 After the birth of Enoch he lived eight hundred years, and had other sons and
daughters. 20 He lived nine hundred and sixty-two years, and then he died. 

5:21 Enoch was sixty-five years old when he begot Methuselah. 22 After
the birth of Methuselah, Enoch walked with God for three hundred years, and had
other sons and daughters. 23 He lived three hundred and sixty-five years. 24
Enoch walked with God, and then was seen no more, because God had taken him
away. 

Methuselah was one hundred and eighty-seven years old when he begot
Lamech. 26 After the birth of Lamech he lived for seven hundred and eighty-two
years, and had other sons and daughters. 27 He lived nine hundred and sixty-nine years, and then he died.

5:28 Lamech was one hundred and eighty-two years old when he begot a son.
29 He named him Noah, saying, ‘ This boy will bring us relief from our work, from
the labour that has come upon us because of the Lord’s curse on the ground.’ 30
After the birth of Noah he lived for five hundred and ninety-five years, and had
other sons and daughters. 31 Lamech lived seven hundred and seventy-seven
years, and then he died. 32 Noah was five hundred years old when he begot Shem,
Ham, and Japheth. 

6:1 The human race began to increase and to spread over the earth and
daughters were born to them. 2 The sons of the gods saw how beautiful these
daughters were, so they took for themselves such women as they chose. 3 But the
Lord said, ‘ My spirit will not remain in a human being for ever; because he is
mortal flesh, he will live only for a hundred and twenty years.’

 6:4 In those days as well as later, when the sons of the gods had
intercourse with the daughters of mortals and children were born to them, the
Nephilim were on the earth; they were the heroes of old, people of renown.

6:5 When the Lord saw how great was the wickedness of human beings on
earth, and how their every thought and inclination were always wicked, 6 he
bitterly regretted that he had made mankind on earth. 7 He said, ‘ I shall wipe
off the face of the earth this human race which I have created — yes, man and
beast, creeping things and birds. I regret that I ever made them.’ 8 Noah,
however, had won the Lord’s favour.

6:9 This is the story of Noah. Noah was a righteous man, the one
blameless man of his time, and he walked with God. 10 He had three sons: Shem,
Ham, and Japheth. 11 God saw that the world was corrupt and full of violence;
12 and seeing this corruption, for the life of everyone on earth was corrupt,
13 God said to Noah, ‘ I am going to bring the whole human race to an end, for
because of them the earth is full of violence. I am about to destroy them, and
the earth along with them. 14 Make yourself an ark with ribs of cypress; cover
it with reeds and coat it inside and out with pitch. 15 This is to be its
design: the length of the ark is to be three hundred cubits, its breadth fifty
cubits, and its height thirty cubits. 16 You are to make a roof for the ark,
giving it a fall of one cubit when complete; put a door in the side of the ark,
and build three decks, lower, middle, and upper. 17 I am about to bring the
waters of the flood over the earth to destroy from under heaven every human
being that has the spirit of life; everything on earth shall perish. 18 But
with you I shall make my covenant, and you will go into the ark, you with your
sons, your wife, and your sons' wives. 19 You are to bring living creatures of
every kind into the ark to keep them alive with you, two of each kind, a male
and a female; 20 two of every kind of bird, beast, and creeping thing are to
come to you to be kept alive. 21 See that you take and store by you every kind
of food that can be eaten; this will be food for you and for them.’ 22 Noah
carried out exactly all God had commanded him. 

7:1 The Lord said to Noah, ‘ Go into the ark, you and all your household;
for you alone in this generation have I found to be righteous. 2 Take with you
seven pairs, a male and female, of all beasts that are ritually clean, and one
pair, a male and female, of all beasts that are not clean; 3 also seven pairs,
males and females, of every bird — to ensure that life continues on earth. 4 For
in seven days’ time I am going to send rain on the earth for forty days and
forty nights, and I shall wipe off the face of the earth every living creature I
have made.’ 5 Noah did all that the Lord had commanded him. 6 He was six
hundred years old when the water of the flood came on the earth

7:7 So to escape the flood Noah went into the ark together with his sons,
his wife, and his sons' wives. 8 [-9] And to him on board the ark went one
pair, a male and a female, of all beasts, clean and unclean, of birds, and of
everything that creeps on the ground, two by two, as God had commanded. 10 At
the end of seven days the water of the flood came over the earth. 11 In the
year when Noah was six hundred years old, on the seventeenth day of the second
month, that very day all the springs of the great deep burst out, the windows of
the heavens were opened, 12 and rain fell on the earth for forty days and forty
nights. 13 That was the day Noah went into the ark with his sons, Shem, Ham,
and Japheth, his own wife, and his three sons' wives. 14 Wild animals of every
kind, cattle of every kind, every kind of thing that creeps on the ground, and
winged birds of every kind — 15 all living creatures came two by two to Noah in
the ark. 16 Those which came were one male and one female of all living things;
they came in as God had commanded Noah, and the Lord closed the door on him. 


7:17 The flood continued on the earth for forty days, and the swelling
waters lifted up the ark so that it rose high above the ground. 18 The ark
floated on the surface of the swollen waters as they increased over the earth.
19 They increased more and more until they covered all the high mountains
everywhere under heaven. 20 The water increased until the mountains were
covered to a depth of fifteen cubits. 21 Every living thing that moved on earth
perished: birds, cattle, wild animals, all creatures that swarm on the ground,
and all human beings. 22 Everything on dry land died, everything that had the
breath of life in its nostrils. 23 God wiped out every living creature that
existed on earth, man and beast, creeping thing and bird; they were all wiped
out over the whole earth, and only Noah and those who were with him in the ark
survived. 

7:24 When the water had increased over the earth for a hundred and fifty
days, 

8:1 God took thought for Noah and all the beasts and cattle with him in
the ark, and he caused a wind to blow over the earth, so that the water began to
subside. 2 The springs of the deep and the windows of the heavens were stopped
up, the downpour from the skies was checked. 3 Gradually the water receded from
the earth, and by the end of a hundred and fifty days it had abated. 4 On the
seventeenth day of the seventh month the ark grounded on the mountains of
Ararat. 5 The water continued to abate until the tenth month, and on the first
day of the tenth month the tops of the mountains could be seen. 

8:6 At the end of forty days Noah opened the hatch that he had made in
the ark, 7 and sent out a raven; it continued flying to and fro until the water
on the earth had dried up. 8 Then Noah sent out a dove to see whether the water
on the earth had subsided. 9 But the dove found no place where she could settle
because all the earth was under water, and so she came back to him in the ark.
Noah reached out and caught her, and brought her into the ark. 10 He waited
seven days more and again sent out the dove from the ark. 11 She came back to
him towards evening with a freshly plucked olive leaf in her beak. Noah knew
then that the water had subsided from the earth’s surface. 12 He waited yet
another seven days and, when he sent out the dove, she did not come back to him.
13 So it came about that, on the first day of the first month of his six hundred
and first year, the water had dried up on the earth, and when Noah removed the
hatch and looked out, he saw that the ground was dry.

 8:14 By the twenty-seventh day of the second month the earth was dry, 15
and God spoke to Noah. 16 ‘ Come out of the ark together with your wife, your
sons, and their wives,’ he said. 17 ‘ Bring out every living creature that is
with you, live things of every kind, birds, beasts, and creeping things, and let
them spread over the earth and be fruitful and increase on it.’ 18 So Noah came
out with his sons, his wife, and his sons’ wives, 19 and all the animals,
creeping things, and birds; everything that moves on the ground came out of the
ark, one kind after another.


8:20 Noah built an altar to the Lord and, taking beasts and birds of
every kind that were ritually clean, he offered them as whole-offerings on it.
21 When the Lord smelt the soothing odour, he said within himself, ‘ Never again
shall I put the earth under a curse because of mankind, however evil their
inclination may be from their youth upwards, nor shall I ever again kill all
living creatures, as I have just done. 22 ‘ As long as the earth lasts, seedtime
and harvest, cold and heat, summer and winter, day and night, they will never
cease.’


 9:1 God blessed Noah and his sons; he said to them, ‘ Be fruitful and
increase in numbers, and fill the earth. 2 Fear and dread of you will come on
all the animals on earth, on all the birds of the air, on everything that moves
on the ground, and on all fish in the sea; they are made subject to you. 3
Every creature that lives and moves will be food for you; I give them all to
you, as I have given you every green plant. 4 But you must never eat flesh with
its life still in it, that is the blood. 5 And further, for your life-blood I
shall demand satisfaction; from every animal I shall require it, and from human
beings also I shall require satisfaction for the death of their fellows. 6
‘ Anyone who sheds human blood, for that human being his blood will be shed;
because in the image of God has God made human beings. 7 ‘ Be fruitful, then,
and increase in number; people the earth and rule over it.’ 

9:8 God said to Noah and his sons: 9 ‘ I am now establishing my covenant
with you and with your descendants after you, 10 and with every living creature
that is with you, all birds and cattle, all the animals with you on earth, all
that have come out of the ark. 11 I shall sustain my covenant with you: never
again will all living creatures be destroyed by the waters of a flood, never
again will there be a flood to lay waste the earth.’ 

 9:12 God said, ‘ For all generations to come, this is the sign which I am
giving of the covenant between myself and you and all living creatures with you:
13 My bow I set in the clouds to be a sign of the covenant between myself and
the earth. 14 When I bring clouds over the earth, the rainbow will appear in
the clouds. 15 ‘ Then I shall remember the covenant which I have made with you
and with all living creatures, and never again will the waters become a flood to
destroy all creation. 16 Whenever the bow appears in the cloud, I shall see it
and remember the everlasting covenant between God and living creatures of every
kind on earth.’ 17 So God said to Noah, ‘ This is the sign of the covenant which
I have established with all that lives on earth.’ 

9:18 The sons of Noah who came out of the ark were Shem, Ham, and
Japheth; Ham was the father of Canaan. 19 These three were the sons of Noah,
and their descendants spread over the whole earth.

 9:20 Noah, who was the first tiller of the soil, planted a vineyard. 21
He drank so much of the wine that he became drunk and lay naked inside his tent.
22 Ham, father of Canaan, saw his father naked, and went out and told his two
brothers. 23 Shem and Japheth took a cloak, put it on their shoulders, and,
walking backwards, covered their father's naked body. They kept their faces
averted, so that they did not see his nakedness. 24 When Noah woke from his
drunkenness and learnt what his youngest son had done to him, 25 he said:
‘ Cursed be Canaan! Most servile of slaves shall he be to his brothers.’ 26 And
he went on: ‘ Bless, O Lord, the tents of Shem; may Canaan be his slave. 27 May
God extend Japheth’s boundaries, let him dwell in the tents of Shem, may Canaan
be his slave.’ 28 After the flood Noah lived for three hundred and fifty years;
29 he was nine hundred and fifty years old when he died. 

10:1 These are the descendants of Noah's sons, Shem, Ham, and Japheth,
the sons born to them after the flood.

10:2 The sons of Japheth: Gomer, Magog, Madai, Javan, Tubal, Meshech, and
Tiras. 3 The sons of Gomer: Ashkenaz, Riphath, and Togarmah. 4 The sons of
Javan: Elishah, Tarshish, Kittim, and Rodanim. 5 From these the peoples of the
coasts and islands separated into their own countries, each with their own
language, family by family, nation by nation. 

10:6 The sons of Ham: Cush, Mizraim, Put, and Canaan. 7 The sons of
Cush: Seba, Havilah, Sabtah, Raamah, and Sabtecha. The sons of Raamah: Sheba and
Dedan. 8 Cush was the father of Nimrod, who began to be known on earth for his
might. 9 He was outstanding as a mighty hunter — as the saying goes, ‘ like
Nimrod, outstanding as a mighty hunter’. 10 At first his kingdom consisted of
Babel, Erech, and Accad, all of them in the land of Shinar. 11 From that land
he migrated to Assyria and built Nineveh, Rehoboth-ir, Calah, 12 and Resen, a
great city between Nineveh and Calah. 13 From Mizraim sprang the Ludim,
Anamites, Lehabites, Naphtuhites, 14 Pathrusites, Casluhites, and the
Caphtorites, from whom the Philistines were descended.

10:15 Canaan was the father of Sidon, who was his eldest son, and Heth,
16 the Jebusites, the Amorites, the Girgashites, 17 the Hivites, the Arkites,
the Sinites, 18 the Arvadites, the Zemarites, and the Hamathites. Later the
Canaanites spread, 19 and then the Canaanite border ran from Sidon towards
Gerar all the way to Gaza; then all the way to Sodom and Gomorrah, Admah, and
Zeboyim as far as Lasha. 20 These were the sons of Ham, by families and
languages, with their countries and nations. 

10:21 Sons were born also to Shem, elder brother of Japheth, the ancestor
of all the sons of Eber. 22 The sons of Shem: Elam, Asshur, Arphaxad, Lud, and
Aram. 23 The sons of Aram: Uz, Hul, Gether, and Mash. 24 Arphaxad was the
father of Shelah, and Shelah the father of Eber. 25 Eber had two sons: one was
named Peleg, because in his time the earth was divided; and his brother's name
was Joktan. 26 Joktan was the father of Almodad, Sheleph, Hazarmoth, Jerah, 27
Hadoram, Uzal, Diklah, 28 Obal, Abimael, Sheba, 29 Ophir, Havilah, and Jobab.
All these were sons of Joktan. 30 They lived in the eastern hill-country, from
Mesha all the way to Sephar. 31 These were the sons of Shem, by families and
languages, with their countries and nations. 

10:32 These were the families of the sons of Noah according to their
genealogies, nation by nation; and from them came the separate nations on earth
after the flood. 

11:1 There was a time when all the world spoke a single language and used
the same words. 2 As people journeyed in the east, they came upon a plain in
the land of Shinar and settled there. 3 They said to one another, ‘ Come, let us
make bricks and bake them hard’; they used bricks for stone and bitumen for
mortar. 4 Then they said, ‘ Let us build ourselves a city and a tower with its
top in the heavens and make a name for ourselves, or we shall be dispersed over
the face of the earth.’ 5 The Lord came down to see the city and tower which
they had built, 6 and he said, ‘ Here they are, one people with a single
language, and now they have started to do this; from now on nothing they have a
mind to do will be beyond their reach. 7 Come, let us go down there and confuse
their language, so that they will not understand what they say to one another.’
8 So the Lord dispersed them from there all over the earth, and they left off
building the city. 9 That is why it is called Babel, because there the Lord
made a babble of the language of the whole world. It was from that place the
Lord scattered people over the face of the earth. 

 11:10 These are the descendants of Shem. Shem was a hundred years old
when he begot Arphaxad, two years after the flood. 11 After the birth of
Arphaxad he lived five hundred years, and had other sons and daughters. 12
Arphaxad was thirty-five years old when he begot Shelah. 13 After the birth of
Shelah he lived four hundred and three years, and had other sons and daughters. 

11:14 Shelah was thirty years old when he begot Eber. 15 After the birth
of Eber he lived four hundred and three years, and had other sons and daughters.

11:16 Eber was thirty-four years old when he begot Peleg. 17 After the
birth of Peleg he lived four hundred and thirty years, and had other sons and
daughters. 

s thirty years old when he begot Reu. 19 After the birth
of Reu he lived two hundred and nine years, and had other sons and daughters. 

11:20 Reu was thirty-two years old when he begot Serug. 21 After the
birth of Serug he lived two hundred and seven years, and had other sons and
daughters. 

11:22 Serug was thirty years old when he begot Nahor. 23 After the birth
of Nahor he lived two hundred years, and had other sons and daughters. 

11:24 Nahor was twenty-nine years old when he begot Terah. 25 After the
birth of Terah he lived a hundred and nineteen years, and had other sons and
daughters. 

11:26 Terah was seventy years old when he begot Abram, Nahor, and Haran.

11:27 These are the descendants of Terah. Terah was the father of Abram,
Nahor, and Haran. Haran was Lot's father. 28 Haran died in the land of his
birth, Ur of the Chaldees, during his father's lifetime. 29 Abram and Nahor
married wives; Abram’s wife was called Sarai, and Nahor’s Milcah. She was the
daughter of Haran, father of Milcah and Iscah. 30 Sarai was barren; she had no
child. 31 Terah took his son Abram, his grandson Lot the son of Haran, and his
daughter-in-law Sarai, Abram's wife, and they set out from Ur of the Chaldees
for Canaan. But when they reached Harran, they settled there. 32 Terah was two 
hundred and five years old when he died in Harran. 


12:1 The Lord said to Abram, ‘ Leave your own country, your kin, and your
father’s house, and go to a country that I will show you. 2 I shall make you
into a great nation; I shall bless you and make your name so great that it will
be used in blessings: 3 those who bless you, I shall bless; those who curse
you, I shall curse. All the peoples on earth will wish to be blessed as you are
blessed.’ 4 Abram, who was seventy-five years old when he left Harran, set out
as the Lord had bidden him, and Lot went with him. 5 He took his wife Sarai,
his brother’s son Lot, and all the possessions they had gathered and the
dependants they had acquired in Harran, and they departed for Canaan. When they
arrived there, 6 Abram went on as far as the sanctuary at Shechem, the
terebinth tree of Moreh. (At that time the Canaanites lived in the land.) 7
When the Lord appeared to him and said, ‘ I am giving this land to your
descendants,’ Abram built an altar there to the Lord who had appeared to him. 8
From there he moved on to the hill-country east of Bethel and pitched his tent
between Bethel on the west and Ai on the east. He built there an altar to the
Lord whom he invoked by name. 9 Thus Abram journeyed by stages towards the
Negeb. 

12:10 The land was stricken by a famine so severe that Abram went down to
Egypt to live there for a time. 11 As he was about to enter Egypt, he said to
his wife Sarai, ‘ I am well aware that you are a beautiful woman, and 12 I know
that when the Egyptians see you and think, “She is his wife,” they will let you
live but they will kill me. 13 Tell them you are my sister, so that all may go
well with me because of you, and my life be spared on your account.’ 


12:14 When Abram arrived in Egypt, the Egyptians saw that Sarai was
indeed very beautiful, 15 and Pharaoh's courtiers, when they saw her, sang her
praises to Pharaoh. She was taken into Pharaoh's household, 16 and he treated
Abram well because of her, and Abram acquired sheep and cattle and donkeys, male
and female slaves, she-donkeys, and camels. 17 But when the Lord inflicted
plagues on Pharaoh and his household on account of Abram’s wife Sarai, 18
Pharaoh summoned Abram. ‘ Why have you treated me like this?’ he said. ‘ Why did
you not tell me she was your wife? 19 Why did you say she was your sister, so
that I took her as a wife? Here she is: take her and go.’ 20 Pharaoh gave his
men orders, and they sent Abram on his way with his wife and all that belonged
to him. 

13:1 From Egypt Abram went up into the Negeb, he and his wife and all
that he possessed, and Lot went with him. 2 Abram had become very rich in
cattle and in silver and gold. 3 From the Negeb he journeyed by stages towards
Bethel, to the place between Bethel and Ai where he had earlier pitched his
tent, 4 and where he had previously set up an altar and invoked the Lord by
name. 5 Since Lot, who was travelling with Abram, also possessed sheep and
cattle and tents, 6 the land could not support them while they were together.
They had so much livestock that they could not settle in the same district, 7
and quarrels arose between Abram's herdsmen and Lot’s. (The Canaanites and the
Perizzites were then living in the land.) 8 Abram said to Lot, ‘ There must be
no quarrelling between us, or between my herdsmen and yours; for we are close
kinsmen. 9 The whole country is there in front of you. Let us part company: if
you go north, I shall go south; if you go south, I shall go north.’ 10 Lot
looked around and saw how well watered the whole plain of Jordan was; all the
way to Zoar it was like the Garden of the Lord, like the land of Egypt. This was
before the Lord had destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah. 11 So Lot chose all the
Jordan plain and took the road to the east. They parted company: 12 Abram
settled in Canaan, while Lot settled among the cities of the plain and pitched
his tent near Sodom. 13 Now the men of Sodom in their wickedness had committed
monstrous sins against the Lord.  


13:14 After Lot and Abram had parted, the Lord said to Abram, ‘ Look
around from where you are towards north, south, east, and west: 15 all the land
you see I shall give to you and to your descendants for ever. 16 I shall make
your descendants countless as the dust of the earth; only if the specks of dust 
on the ground could be counted could your descendants be counted. 17 Now go
through the length and breadth of the land, for I am giving it to you.’ 18
Abram moved his tent and settled by the terebinths of Mamre at Hebron, where he
built an altar to the Lord. 

14:1 In those days King Amraphel of Shinar, King Arioch of Ellasar, King
Kedorlaomer of Elam, and King Tidal of Goyim 2 went to war against King Bera of
Sodom, King Birsha of Gomorrah, King Shinab of Admah, King Shemeber of Zeboyim,
and the king of Bela, which is Zoar. 3 These kings joined forces in the valley
of Siddim, which is now the Dead Sea. 4 For twelve years they had been subject
to Kedorlaomer, but in the thirteenth year they rebelled. 5 Then in the
fourteenth year Kedorlaomer and the kings allied with him came and defeated the
Rephaim in Ashteroth-karnaim, the Zuzim in Ham, the Emim in Shaveh-kiriathaim,
6 and the Horites in their hill-country, Seir as far as El-paran on the edge of
the wilderness. 7 On their way back they came to En-mishpat, which is now
Kadesh, and laid waste all the territory of the Amalekites as well as that of
the Amorites who lived in Hazazon-tamar. 8 Then the kings of Sodom, Gomorrah,
Admah, Zeboyim, and Bela, which is now Zoar, marched out and drew up their
forces against them in the valley of Siddim, 9 against King Kedorlaomer of
Elam, King Tidal of Goyim, King Amraphel of Shinar, and King Arioch of Ellasar,
four kings against five. 10 Now the valley of Siddim was full of bitumen pits,
and when the kings of Sodom and Gomorrah fled, some of their men fell into them,
but the rest made their escape to the hills. 11 The four kings captured all the
flocks and herds of Sodom and Gomorrah and all their provisions, and withdrew,
12 carrying off Abram's nephew, Lot, who was living in Sodom, and his flocks and
herds. 

14:13 A fugitive brought the news to Abram the Hebrew, who at that time
had his camp by the terebinths of Mamre the Amorite. This Mamre was the brother
of Eshcol and Aner, allies of Abram. 14 When Abram heard that his kinsman had
been taken prisoner, he mustered his three hundred and eighteen retainers, men
born in his household, and went in pursuit as far as Dan. 15 Abram and his
followers surrounded the enemy by night, routed them, and pursued them as far as
Hobah, north of Damascus. 16 He recovered all the flocks and herds and also his
kinsman Lot with his flocks and herds, together with the women and all his
company. 17 On Abram’s return from defeating Kedorlaomer and the allied kings,
the king of Sodom came out to meet him in the valley of Shaveh, which is now the
King’s Valley. 18 Then the king of Salem, Melchizedek, brought food and wine.
He was priest of God Most High, 19 and he pronounced this blessing on Abram:
‘ Blessed be Abram by God Most High, Creator of the heavens and the earth. 20
And blessed be God Most High, who has delivered your enemies into your hand.’
Then Abram gave him a tithe of all the booty. 


 14:21 The king of Sodom said to Abram, ‘ Give me the people, and you can
take the livestock.’ 22 But Abram replied, ‘ I lift my hand and swear by the
Lord, God Most High, Creator of the heavens and the earth : 23 not a thread or a
sandal-thong shall I accept of anything that is yours. You will never say, “ I
made Abram rich.” 24 I shall accept nothing but what the young men have eaten
and the share of the men who went with me, Aner, Eshcol, and Mamre; they must
have their share.’


15:1 After this the word of the Lord came to Abram in a vision. He said,
‘ Do not be afraid, Abram; I am your shield. Your reward will be very great.’ 2
Abram replied, ‘ Lord God, what can you give me, seeing that I am childless? The
heir to my household is Eliezer of Damascus. 3 You have given me no children,
and so my heir must be a slave born in my house.’ 4 The word of the Lord came
to him: ‘ This man will not be your heir; your heir will be a child of your own
body.’ 5 He brought Abram outside and said, ‘ Look up at the sky, and count the
stars, if you can. So many will your descendants be.’ 

15:6
Abram put his faith in the Lord, who reckoned it to him as
righteousness, 7 and said, ‘ I am the Lord who brought you out from Ur of the
Chaldees to give you this land as your possession.’ 8 Abram asked, ‘ Lord God,
how can I be sure that I shall occupy it?’ 9 The Lord answered, ‘ Bring me a
heifer three years old, a she-goat three years old, a ram three years old, a
turtle-dove, and a young pigeon.’ 10 Abram brought him all these, cut the
animals in two, and set the pieces opposite each other, but he did not cut the
birds in half. 11 Birds of prey swooped down on the carcasses, but he scared
them away. 12 As the sun was going down, Abram fell into a trance and great and
fearful darkness came over him. 13 The Lord said to Abram, ‘ Know this for
certain: your descendants will be aliens living in a land that is not their own;
they will be enslaved and held in oppression for four hundred years. 14 But I
shall punish the nation whose slaves they are, and afterwards they will depart
with great possessions. 15 You yourself will join your forefathers in peace and
be buried at a ripe old age. 16 But it will be the fourth generation who will
return here, for till then the Amorites will not be ripe for punishment.’ 17
The sun went down and it was dusk, and there appeared a smoking brazier and a
flaming torch which passed between the divided pieces. 18 That day the Lord
made a covenant with Abram, and said, ‘ I give to your descendants this land from
the river of Egypt to the Great River, the river Euphrates, 19 the territory of
the Kenites, Kenizzites, Kadmonites, 20 Hittites, Perizzites, Rephaim, 21
Amorites, Canaanites, Girgashites, and Jebusites.’

16:1
Abram’s wife Sarai had borne him no children. She had, however, an
Egyptian slave-girl named Hagar, 2 and Sarai said to Abram, ‘ The Lord has not
let me have a child. Take my slave-girl; perhaps through her I shall have a
son.’ Abram heeded what his wife said; 3 so Sarai brought her slave-girl, Hagar
the Egyptian, to her husband and gave her to Abram as a wife. When this happened
Abram had been in Canaan for ten years. 4 He lay with Hagar and she conceived;
and when she knew that she was pregnant, she looked down on her mistress. 5
Sarai complained to Abram, ‘ I am being wronged; you must do something about it.
It was I who gave my slave-girl into your arms, but since she has known that she
is pregnant, she has despised me. May the Lord see justice done between you and
me.’ 6 Abram replied, ‘ Your slave-girl is in your hands; deal with her as you
please.’ So Sarai ill-treated her and she ran away from her mistress.

16:7
The angel of the Lord came upon Hagar by a spring in the wilderness,
the spring on the road to Shur, 8 and he said, ‘ Hagar, Sarai's slave-girl,
where have you come from and where are you going?’ She answered, ‘ I am running
away from Sarai my mistress.’ 9 The angel of the Lord said to her, ‘ Go back to
your mistress and submit to ill-treatment at her hands.’ 10 He also said, ‘ I
shall make your descendants too many to be counted.’ 11 The angel of the Lord
went on: ‘ You are with child and will bear a son. You are to name him Ishmael,
because the Lord has heard of your ill-treatment. 12 He will be like the wild
ass; his hand will be against everyone and everyone’s hand against him; and he
will live at odds with all his kin.’ 13 Hagar called the Lord who spoke to her
by the name El-roi, for she said, ‘ Have I indeed seen God and still live after
that vision?’ 14 That is why the well is called Beer-lahai-roi; it lies between
Kadesh and Bered. 15 Hagar bore Abram a son, and he named the child she bore
him Ishmael. 16 Abram was eighty-six years old when she bore Ishmael.

17:1
When Abram was ninety-nine years old, the Lord appeared to him and
said, ‘ I am God Almighty. Live always in my presence and be blameless, 2 so
that I may make my covenant with you and give you many descendants.’ 3 Abram
bowed low, and God went on, 4 ‘ This is my covenant with you: you are to be the
father of many nations. 5 Your name will no longer be Abram, but Abraham; for I
shall make you father of many nations. 6 I shall make you exceedingly fruitful;
I shall make nations out of you, and kings shall spring from you. 7 I shall
maintain my covenant with you and your descendants after you, generation after
generation, an everlasting covenant: I shall be your God, yours and your
descendants'. 8 As a possession for all time I shall give you and your
descendants after you the land in which you now are aliens, the whole of Canaan,
and I shall be their God.’

17:9
God said to Abraham, ‘ For your part, you must keep my covenant, you
and your descendants after you, generation by generation. 10 This is how you
are to keep this covenant between myself and you and your descendants after you:
circumcise yourselves, every male among you. 11 You must circumcise the flesh
of your foreskin, and it will be the sign of the covenant between us. 12 Every
male among you in every generation must be circumcised on the eighth day, both
those born in your house and any foreigner, not a member of your family but
purchased. 13 Circumcise both those born in your house and those you buy; thus
your flesh will be marked with the sign of my everlasting covenant. 14 Every
uncircumcised male, everyone who has not had the flesh of his foreskin
circumcised, will be cut off from the kin of his father; he has broken my
covenant.’


17:15
God said to Abraham, ‘ As for Sarai your wife, you are to call her
not Sarai, but Sarah. 16 I shall bless her and give you a son by her. I shall
bless her and she will be the mother of nations; from her kings of peoples will
spring.’ 17 Abraham bowed low, and laughing said to himself, ‘ Can a son be born
to a man who is a hundred years old? Can Sarah bear a child at ninety?’ 18 He
said to God, ‘ If only Ishmael might enjoy your special favour!’ 19 But God
replied, ‘ No; your wife Sarah will bear you a son, and you are to call him
Isaac. With him I shall maintain my covenant as an everlasting covenant for his
descendants after him. 20 But I have heard your request about Ishmael; I have
blessed him and I shall make him fruitful. I shall give him many descendants; he
will be father of twelve princes, and I shall raise a great nation from him. 21
But my covenant I shall fulfil with Isaac, whom Sarah will bear to you at this
time next year.’ 22 When he had finished talking with Abraham, God left him.

17:23
Then Abraham took Ishmael his son, everyone who had been born in
his household and everyone he had bought, every male in his household, and that
same day he circumcised the flesh of their foreskins as God had commanded him.
24 Abraham was ninety-nine years old when he was circumcised. 25 Ishmael was
thirteen years old when he was circumcised. 26 Both Abraham and Ishmael were
circumcised on the same day. 27 All the men of Abraham’s household, born in the
house or bought from foreigners, were circumcised with him.

18:1
The Lord appeared to Abraham by the terebinths of Mamre, as he was
sitting at the opening of his tent in the heat of the day. 2 He looked up and
saw three men standing over against him. On seeing them, he hurried from his
tent door to meet them. Bowing low 3 he said, ‘ Sirs, if I have deserved your
favour, do not go past your servant without a visit. 4 Let me send for some
water so that you may bathe your feet; and rest under this tree, 5 while I
fetch a little food so that you may refresh yourselves. Afterwards you may
continue the journey which has brought you my way.’ They said, ‘ Very well, do as
you say.’ 6 So Abraham hurried into the tent to Sarah and said, ‘ Quick, take
three measures of flour, knead it, and make cakes.’ 7 He then hastened to the
herd, chose a fine, tender calf, and gave it to a servant, who prepared it at
once. 8 He took curds and milk and the calf which was now ready, set it all
before them, and there under the tree waited on them himself while they ate.

18:9
They asked him where Sarah his wife was, and he replied, ‘ She is in
the tent.’ 10 One of them said, ‘ About this time next year I shall come back to
you, and your wife Sarah will have a son.’ Now Sarah was listening at the
opening of the tent close by him. 11 Both Abraham and Sarah were very old,
Sarah being well past the age of childbearing. 12 So she laughed to herself and
said, ‘ At my time of life I am past bearing children, and my husband is old.’
13 The Lord said to Abraham, ‘ Why did Sarah laugh and say, “Can I really bear a
child now that I am so old?” 14 Is anything impossible for the Lord? In due
season, at this time next year, I shall come back to you, and Sarah will have a
son.’ 15 Because she was frightened, Sarah lied and denied that she had
laughed; but he said, ‘ Yes, you did laugh.’

18:16
The men set out and looked down towards Sodom, and Abraham went
with them to see them on their way. 17 The Lord had thought to himself, ‘ Shall
I conceal from Abraham what I am about to do? 18 He will become a great and
powerful nation, and all nations on earth will wish to be blessed as he is
blessed. 19 I have singled him out so that he may charge his sons and family
after him to conform to the way of the Lord and do what is right and just; thus
I shall fulfil for him all that I have promised.’ 20 The Lord said, ‘ How great
is the outcry over Sodom and Gomorrah! How grave their sin must be! 21 I shall
go down and see whether their deeds warrant the outcry reaching me. I must know
the truth.’ 22 When the men turned and went off towards Sodom, Abraham remained
standing before the Lord. 23 Abraham drew near him and asked, ‘ Will you really
sweep away innocent and wicked together? 24 Suppose there are fifty innocent in
the city; will you really sweep it away, and not pardon the place because of the
fifty innocent there? 25 Far be it from you to do such a thing—to kill innocent
and wicked together; for then the innocent would suffer with the wicked. Far be
it from you! Should not the judge of all the earth do what is just?’ 26 The
Lord replied, ‘ If I find in Sodom fifty innocent, I shall pardon the whole place
for their sake.’ 27 Abraham said, ‘ May I make so bold as to speak to the Lord,
I who am nothing but dust and ashes: 28 suppose there are five short of fifty
innocent? Will you destroy the whole city for the lack of five men?’ ‘ If I find
forty-five there,’ he replied, ‘ I shall not destroy it.’ 29 Abraham spoke
again, ‘ Suppose forty can be found there?’ ‘ For the sake of the forty I shall
not do it,’ he replied. 30 Then Abraham said, ‘ Let not my Lord become angry if
I speak again: suppose thirty can be found there?’ He answered, ‘ If I find
thirty there, I shall not do it.’ 31 Abraham continued, ‘ May I make so bold as
to speak to the Lord: suppose twenty can be found there?’ He replied, ‘ For the
sake of the twenty I shall not destroy it.’ 32 Abraham said, ‘ Let not my Lord
become angry if I speak just once more: suppose ten can be found there?’ ‘ For
the sake of the ten I shall not destroy it,’ said the Lord. 33 When the Lord
had finished talking to Abraham, he went away, and Abraham returned home.

19:1
The two angels came to Sodom in the evening while Lot was sitting by
the city gate. When he saw them, he rose to meet them and bowing low 2 he said,
‘ I pray you, sirs, turn aside to your servant’s house to spend the night there
and bathe your feet. You can continue your journey in the morning.’ ‘ No,’ they
answered, ‘ we shall spend the night in the street.’ 3 But Lot was so insistent
that they accompanied him into his house. He prepared a meal for them, baking
unleavened bread for them to eat.


19:4 Before they had lain down to sleep, the men of Sodom, both young and
old, everyone without exception, surrounded the house. 5 They called to Lot:
‘ Where are the men who came to you tonight? Bring them out to us so that we may
have intercourse with them.’ 6 Lot went out into the doorway to them, and,
closing the door behind him, 7 said, ‘ No, my friends, do not do anything so
wicked. 8 Look, I have two daughters, virgins both of them; let me bring them
out to you, and you can do what you like with them. But do nothing to these men,
because they have come under the shelter of my roof.’ 9 They said, ‘ Out of our
way! This fellow has come and settled here as an alien, and does he now take it
upon himself to judge us? We will treat you worse than them.’ They crowded in on
Lot and pressed close to break down the door. 10 But the two men inside reached
out, pulled Lot into the house, and shut the door. 11 Then they struck those in
the doorway, both young and old, with blindness so that they could not find the
entrance. 

19:12 The two men said to Lot, ‘ Have you anyone here, sons-in-law, sons,
or daughters, or anyone else belonging to you in the city? Get them out of this
place, 13 because we are going to destroy it. The Lord is aware of the great
outcry against its citizens and has sent us to destroy it.’ 14 So Lot went out
and urged his sons-in-law to get out of the place at once. ‘ The Lord is about to
destroy the city,’ he said. But they did not take him seriously.

 19:15 As soon as it was dawn, the angels urged Lot: ‘ Quick, take your
wife and your two daughters who are here, or you will be destroyed when the city
is punished.’ 16 When he delayed, they grabbed his hand and the hands of his
wife and two daughters, because the Lord had spared him, and they led him to
safety outside the city. 17 After they had brought them out, one said, ‘ Flee
for your lives! Do not look back or stop anywhere in the plain. Flee to the
hills or you will be destroyed.’ 18 Lot replied, ‘ No, sirs! 19 You have shown
your servant favour, and even more by your unfailing care you have saved my
life, but I cannot escape to the hills; I shall be overtaken by the disaster,
and die. 20 Look, here is a town, only a small place, near enough for me to get
to quickly. Let me escape to this small place and save my life.’ 21 He said to
him, ‘ I grant your request: I shall not overthrow the town you speak of. 22 But
flee there quickly, because I can do nothing until you are there.’ That is why
the place was called Zoar. 23 The sun had risen over the land as Lot entered
Zoar, 24 and the Lord rained down fire and brimstone from the skies on Sodom
and Gomorrah. 25 He overthrew those cities and destroyed all the plain, with
everyone living there and everything growing in the ground. 26 But Lot's wife
looked back, and she turned into a pillar of salt. 

19:27 Early next morning Abraham went to the place where he had stood in
the presence of the Lord. 28 As he looked over Sodom and Gomorrah and all the
wide extent of the plain, he saw thick smoke rising from the earth like smoke
from a kiln. 29 Thus it was, when God destroyed the cities of the plain, he
took thought for Abraham by rescuing Lot from the total destruction of the
cities where he had been living. 

19:30 Because Lot was afraid to stay in Zoar, he went up from there and
settled with his two daughters in the hill-country, where he lived with them in
a cave. 31 The elder daughter said to the younger, ‘ Our father is old and there
is not a man in the country to come to us in the usual way. 32 Come now, let us
ply our father with wine and then lie with him and in this way preserve the
family through our father.’ 33 That night they gave him wine to drink, and the
elder daughter came and lay with him, and he did not know when she lay down and
when she got up. 34 Next day the elder said to the younger, ‘ Last night I lay
with my father. Let us ply him with wine again tonight; then you go in and lie
with him. So we shall preserve the family through our father.’ 35 They gave
their father wine to drink that night also; and the younger daughter went and
lay with him, and he did not know when she lay down and when she got up. 36 In
this way both of Lot’s daughters came to be pregnant by their father. 37 The
elder daughter bore a son and called him Moab; he was the ancestor of the
present-day Moabites. 38 The younger also bore a son, whom she called Ben-ammi;
he was the ancestor of the present-day Ammonites. 

 20:1 Abraham journeyed by stages from there into the Negeb, and settled
between Kadesh and Shur, living as an alien in Gerar. 2 He said of Sarah his
wife that she was his sister, and King Abimelech of Gerar had her brought to
him. 3 But God came to Abimelech in a dream by night and said, ‘ You shall die
because of this woman whom you have taken; she is a married woman.’ 4
Abimelech, who had not gone near her, protested, ‘ Lord, will you destroy people
who are innocent? 5 He told me himself that she was his sister, and she also
said that he was her brother. It was in good faith and in all innocence that I
did this.’ 6 ‘ Yes, I know that you acted in good faith,’ God replied in the
dream. ‘ Indeed, it was I who held you back from committing a sin against me.
That was why I did not let you touch her. 7 But now send back the man's wife;
he is a prophet and will intercede on your behalf, and you will live. But if you
do not give her back, I tell you that you are doomed to die, you and all your
household.’

20:8 Next morning Abimelech rose early and called together all his court
officials; when he told them the whole story, the men were terrified. 9
Abimelech then summoned Abraham. ‘ Why have you treated us like this?’ he
demanded. ‘ What harm have I done you that you should bring this great sin on me
and my kingdom? You have done to me something you ought never to have done.’ 10
And he asked, ‘ What was your purpose in doing this?’ 11 Abraham answered, ‘ I
said to myself, “There is no fear of God in this place, and I shall be killed
for the sake of my wife.” 12 She is in fact my sister, my father's daughter
though not by my mother, and she became my wife. 13 When God set me wandering
from my father’s house, I said to her, “There is a duty towards me which you
must loyally fulfil: wherever we go, you must say that I am your brother.”’ 14
Then Abimelech took sheep and cattle and male and female slaves and gave them to
Abraham. He returned Sarah to him 15 and said, ‘ My country is at your disposal;
settle wherever you please.’ 16 To Sarah he said, ‘ I have given your brother a
thousand pieces of silver to compensate you for all that has befallen you; you
are completely cleared.’ 17 Then Abraham interceded with God, and he healed 
Abimelech, his wife, and his slave-girls, so that they could have children; 18
for the Lord had made every woman in Abimelech's household barren on account of
Sarah, Abraham's wife. 

 21:1 The Lord showed favour to Sarah as he had promised, and made good
what he had said about her. 2 She conceived and at the time foretold by God she
bore a son to Abraham in his old age. 3 The son whom Sarah bore to him Abraham
named Isaac, 4 and when Isaac was eight days old Abraham circumcised him, as
decreed by God. 5 Abraham was a hundred years old when his son Isaac was born.
6 Sarah said, ‘ God has given me good reason to laugh, and everyone who hears
will laugh with me.’ 7 She added, ‘ Whoever would have told Abraham that Sarah
would suckle children? Yet I have borne him a son in his old age.’ 8 The boy
grew and was weaned, and on the day of his weaning Abraham gave a great feast.

21:9 Sarah saw the son whom Hagar the Egyptian had borne to Abraham
playing with Isaac, 10 and she said to Abraham, ‘ Drive out this slave-girl and
her son! I will not have this slave’s son sharing the inheritance with my son
Isaac.’ 11 Abraham was very upset at this because of Ishmael, 12 but God said
to him, ‘ Do not be upset for the boy and your slave-girl. Do as Sarah says,
because it is through Isaac's line that your name will be perpetuated. 13 I
shall make a nation of the slave-girl's son, because he also is your child.’

21:14 Early next morning Abraham took some food and a full water-skin and
gave them to Hagar. He set the child on her shoulder and sent her away, and she
wandered about in the wilderness of Beersheba. 15 When the water in the skin
was finished, she thrust the child under a bush, 16 then went and sat down some
way off, about a bowshot distant. ‘ How can I watch the child die?’ she said, and
sat there, weeping bitterly. 17 God heard the child crying, and the angel of
God called from heaven to Hagar, ‘ What is the matter, Hagar? Do not be afraid:
God has heard the child crying where you laid him. 18 Go, lift the child and
hold him in your arms, because I shall make of him a great nation.’ 19 Then God
opened her eyes and she saw a well full of water; she went to it, filled the
water-skin, and gave the child a drink. 20 God was with the child as he grew
up. He lived in the wilderness of Paran and became an archer; 21 and his mother
got him a wife from Egypt.

 21:22 About that time Abimelech, with Phicol the commander of his army,
said to Abraham: ‘ God is with you in all that you do. 23 Here and now swear to
me in the name of God, that you will not break faith with me or with my children
and my descendants. As I have kept faith with you, so must you keep faith with
me and with the country where you are living.’ 24 Abraham said, ‘ I swear it.’

21:25 It happened that Abraham had a complaint to make to Abimelech about
a well which Abimelech’s men had seized. 26 Abimelech said, ‘ I do not know who
did this. Up to this moment you never mentioned it, nor did I hear of it from
anyone else.’ 27 Then Abraham took sheep and cattle and gave them to Abimelech,
and the two of them made a pact. 28 Abraham set seven ewe lambs apart, 29 and
when Abimelech asked him why he had done so, 30 he said, ‘ Accept these seven
lambs from me as a testimony on my behalf that I dug this well.’ 31 This is why
that place was called Beersheba, because there the two of them swore an oath.
32 When they had made the pact at Beersheba, Abimelech departed with Phicol the
commander of his army and returned to the country of the Philistines. 33
Abraham planted a tamarisk tree at Beersheba, and there he invoked the Lord, the
Everlasting God, by name. 34 He lived as an alien in the country of the
Philistines for many years. 

22:1 Some time later God put Abraham to the test. ‘ Abraham!’ he called to
him, and Abraham replied, ‘ Here I am!’ 2 God said, ‘ Take your son, your one and
only son Isaac whom you love, and go to the land of Moriah. There you shall
offer him as a sacrifice on one of the heights which I shall show you.’ 3 Early
in the morning Abraham saddled his donkey, and took with him two of his men and
his son Isaac; and having split firewood for the sacrifice, he set out for the
place of which God had spoken. 4 On the third day Abraham looked up and saw the
shrine in the distance. 5 He said to his men, ‘ Stay here with the donkey while
I and the boy go on ahead. We shall worship there, and then come back to you.’

22:6 Abraham took the wood for the sacrifice and put it on his son
Isaac's shoulder, while he himself carried the fire and the knife. As the two of
them went on together, 7 Isaac spoke. ‘ Father!’ he said. Abraham answered,
‘ What is it, my son?’ Isaac said, ‘ Here are the fire and the wood, but where is
the sheep for a sacrifice?’ 8 Abraham answered, ‘ God will provide himself with
a sheep for a sacrifice, my son.’ The two of them went on together 9 until they
came to the place of which God had spoken. There Abraham built an altar and
arranged the wood. He bound his son Isaac and laid him on the altar on top of
the wood. 10 He reached out for the knife to slay his son, 11 but the angel of
the Lord called to him from heaven, ‘ Abraham! Abraham!’ He answered, ‘ Here I
am!’ 12 The angel said, ‘ Do not raise your hand against the boy; do not touch
him. Now I know that you are a godfearing man. You have not withheld from me
your son, your only son.’ 13 Abraham looked round, and there in a thicket he
saw a ram caught by its horns. He went, seized the ram, and offered it as a
sacrifice instead of his son. 14 Abraham named that shrine ‘ The Lord will
provide'; and to this day the saying is: ‘ In the mountain of the Lord it was
provided.’

22:15 Then the angel of the Lord called from heaven a second time to
Abraham 16 and said, ‘ This is the word of the Lord: By my own self I swear that
because you have done this and have not withheld your son, your only son, 17 I
shall bless you abundantly and make your descendants as numerous as the stars in
the sky or the grains of sand on the seashore. Your descendants will possess the
cities of their enemies. 18 All nations on earth will wish to be blessed as
your descendants are blessed, because you have been obedient to me.’

22:19 Abraham then went back to his men, and together they returned to
Beersheba; and there Abraham remained

22:20 After this Abraham was told, ‘ Milcah has borne sons to your brother
Nahor: 21 Uz his firstborn, then his brother Buz, and Kemuel father of Aram,
22 and Kesed, Hazo, Pildash, Jidlaph, and Bethuel; 23 and a daughter, Rebecca,
has been born to Bethuel.’ These eight Milcah bore to Abraham’s brother Nahor.
24 His concubine, whose name was Reumah, also bore him sons: Tebah, Gaham,
Tahash, and Maacah. 

23:1 Sarah lived to be a hundred and twenty-seven years old, 2 and she
died in Kiriath-arba (which is Hebron) in Canaan. Abraham went in to mourn over
Sarah and to weep for her. 3 When at las t he rose and left the presence of his
dead one, he approached the Hittites: 4 ‘I am an alien and a settler among
you,’ he said. ‘ Make over to me some ground among you for a burial-place, that I
may bury my dead.’ 5 The Hittites answered, 6 ‘ Listen to us, sir: you are a
mighty prince among us; bury your dead in the best grave we have. There is not
one of us who would deny you his grave or hinder you from burying your dead.’

23:7 Abraham rose and bowing low to the Hittites, the people of that
region, 8 he said to them, ‘ If you have a mind to help me about the burial,
then listen to me: speak to Ephron son of Zohar on my behalf, 9 and ask him to
grant me the cave that belongs to him at Machpelah, at the far end of his land.
In your presence let him make it over to me for the full price, so that I may
take possession of it as a burial-place.’ 10 Ephron was sitting with the other
Hittites and in the hearing of all who had assembled at the city gate he gave
Abraham this answer: 11 ‘ No, sir; hear me: I shall make you a gift of the land
and also give you the cave which is on it. In the presence of my people I give
it to you; so bury your dead.’ 12 Abraham bowed low before the people 13 and
said to Ephron in their hearing, ‘ Do you really mean it? But listen to me — let me
give you the price of the land: take it from me, and I shall bury my dead
there.’ 14 Ephron answered, 15 ‘ Listen, sir: land worth four hundred shekels
of silver, what is that between me and you! You may bury your dead there.’ 16
Abraham closed the bargain with him and weighed out the amount that Ephron had
named in the hearing of the Hittites, four hundred shekels of the standard
recognized by merchants.

23:17 So the plot of land belonging to Ephron at Machpelah to the east of
Mamre, the plot, the cave that is on it, with all the trees in the whole area,
became the 18 legal possession of Abraham, in the presence of all the Hittites
who had assembled at the city gate. 19 After this Abraham buried his wife Sarah
in the cave on the plot of land at Machpelah to the east of Mamre, which is
Hebron, in Canaan. 20 Thus, by purchase from the Hittites, the plot and the
cave on it became Abraham’s possession as a burial-place.

24:1 Abraham was by now a very old man, and the Lord had blessed him in
all that he did. 2 Abraham said to the servant who had been longest in his
service and was in charge of all he owned, ‘ Give me your solemn oath: 3 I want
you to swear by the Lord, the God of heaven and earth, that you will not take a
wife for my son from the women of the Canaanites among whom I am living. 4 You
must go to my own country and to my own kindred to find a wife for my son
Isaac.’ 5 ‘ What if the woman is unwilling to come with me to this country?’ the
servant asked. ‘ Must I take your son back to the land you came from?’ 6 Abraham
said to him, ‘ On no account are you to take my son back there. 7 The Lord the
God of heaven who took me from my father's house and the land of my birth, the
Lord who swore to me that he would give this land to my descendants — he will send
his angel before you, and you will take a wife from there for my son. 8 If the
woman is unwilling to come with you, then you will be released from your oath to
me; only you must not take my son back there.’ 9 The servant then put his hand
under his master Abraham’s thigh and swore that oath. 

24:10 The servant chose ten camels from his master's herds and, with all
kinds of gifts from his master, he went to Aram-naharaim, to the town where
Nahor lived. 11 Towards evening, the time when the women go out to draw water,
he made the camels kneel down by the well outside the town. 12 ‘ Lord God of my
master Abraham,’ he said, ‘ give me good fortune this day; keep faith with my
master Abraham. 13 Here I am by the spring, as the women of the town come out
to draw water. 14 I shall say to a girl, “Please lower your jar so that I may
drink”; and if she answers, “Drink, and I shall water your camels also,” let
that be the girl whom you intend for your servant Isaac. In this way I shall
know that you have kept faith with my master.’ 

 24:15 Before he had finished praying, he saw Rebecca coming out with her
water-jar on her shoulder. She was the daughter of Bethuel son of Milcah, the
wife of Abraham’s brother Nahor. 16 The girl was very beautiful and a virgin
guiltless of intercourse with any man. She went down to the spring, filled her
jar, and came up again. 17 Abraham’s servant hurried to meet her and said,
‘ Will you give me a little water from your jar?’ 18 ‘ Please drink, sir,’ she
answered, and at once lowered her jar on to her hand to let him drink. 19 When
she had finished giving him a drink, she said, ‘ I shall draw water for your
camels also until they have had enough.’ 20 She quickly emptied her jar into
the water trough, and then hurrying again to the well she drew water and watered
all the camels.

24:21 The man was watching quietly to see whether or not the Lord had
made his journey successful, 22 and when the camels had finished drinking, he
took a gold nose-ring weighing half a shekel, and two bracelets for her wrists
weighing ten shekels, also of gold. 23 ‘ Tell me, please, whose daughter you
are,’ he said. ‘ Is there room in your father’s house for us to spend the night?’
24 She answered, ‘ I am the daughter of Bethuel son of Nahor and Milcah; 25 we
have plenty of straw and fodder and also room for you to spend the night.’ 26
So the man bowed down and prostrated himself before the Lord 27 and said,
‘ Blessed be the Lord the God of my master Abraham. His faithfulness to my master
has been constant and unfailing, for he has guided me to the house of my
master’s kinsman.’

24:28 The girl ran to her mother’s house and told them what had happened.
29 [-30] Rebecca had a brother named Laban, and, when he saw the nose-ring, and
also the bracelets on his sister’s wrists, and heard his sister Rebecca’s
account of what the man had said to her, he hurried out to the spring. When he 
got there he found the man still standing by the camels. 31 ‘ Come in,’ he said,
‘ you whom the Lord has blessed. Why are you staying out here? I have prepared
the house and there is a place for the camels.’ 32 The man went into the house,
while the camels were unloaded and provided with straw and fodder, and water was
brought for him and his men to bathe their feet. 33 But when food was set
before him, he protested, ‘ I will not eat until I have delivered my message.’
Laban said, ‘ Let us hear it.’

24:34 ‘ I am Abraham's servant,’ he answered. 35 ‘ The Lord has greatly
blessed my master, and he has become a wealthy man: the Lord has given him
flocks and herds, silver and gold, male and female slaves, camels and donkeys.
36 My master’s wife Sarah in her old age bore him a son, to whom he has assigned
all that he has. 37 My master made me swear an oath, saying, “You must not take
a wife for my son from the women of the Canaanites in whose land I am living;
38 but go to my father’s home, to my family, to get a wife for him.” 39 I
asked, “What if the woman will not come with me?” 40 He answered, “The Lord, in
whose presence I have lived, will send his angel with you and make your journey
successful. You are to take a wife for my son from my family and from my
father’s house; 41 then you will be released from the charge I have laid upon
you. But if, when you come to my family, they refuse to give her to you, you
will likewise be released from the charge.” 

24:42 ‘ Today when I came to the spring, I prayed, “Lord God of my master
Abraham, if you will make my journey successful, let it turn out in this way:
43 here I am by the spring; when a young woman comes out to draw water, I shall
say to her, ‘ Give me a little water from your jar to drink.’ 44 If she answers,
‘ Yes, do drink, and I shall draw water for your camels as well,’ she is the
woman whom the Lord intends for my master’s son.” 45 Before I had finished
praying, I saw Rebecca coming out with her water-jar on her shoulder. She went
down to the spring and drew water, and I said to her, “Will you please give me a
drink?” 46 At once she lowered her jar from her shoulder and said, “Drink; and
I shall also water your camels.” So I drank, and she also gave the camels water.
47 I asked her whose daughter she was, and she said, “I am the daughter of
Bethuel son of Nahor and Milcah.” Then I put the ring in her nose and the
bracelets on her wrists, 48 and I bowed low in worship before the Lord. I
blessed the Lord, the God of my master Abraham, who had led me by the right road
to take my master’s niece for his son. 49 Now tell me if you mean to deal
loyally and faithfully with my master. If not, say so, and I shall turn
elsewhere.’ 

24:50 Laban and Bethuel replied, ‘ Since this is from the Lord, we can say
nothing for or against it. 51 Here is Rebecca; take her and go. She shall be
the wife of your master’s son, as the Lord has decreed.’ 52 When Abraham’s
servant heard what they said, he prostrated himself on the ground before the
Lord. 53 Then he brought out silver and gold ornaments, and articles of
clothing, and gave them to Rebecca, and he gave costly gifts to her brother and
her mother. 54 He and his men then ate and drank and spent the night there.
 When they rose in the morning, Abraham’s servant said, ‘ Give me leave to go
back to my master.’ 55 Rebecca’s brother and her mother replied, ‘ Let the girl
stay with us for a few days, say ten days, and then she can go.’ 56 But he said
to them, ‘ Do not detain me, for it is the Lord who has granted me success. Give
me leave to go back to my master.’ 57 They said, ‘ Let us call the girl and see
what she says.’ 58 They called Rebecca and asked her if she would go with the
man, and she answered, ‘ Yes, I will go.’ 59 So they let their sister Rebecca
and her maid go with Abraham’s servant and his men. 60 They blessed Rebecca and
said to her: ‘ You are our sister, may you be the mother of many children; may
your sons possess the cities of their enemies.’ 61 Rebecca and her companions
mounted their camels to follow the man. So the servant took Rebecca and set out.

24:62 Isaac meanwhile had moved on as far as Beer-lahai-roi and was
living in the Negeb. 63 One evening when he had gone out into the open country
hoping to meet them, he looked and saw camels approaching. 64 When Rebecca saw
Isaac, she dismounted from her camel, 65 saying to the servant, ‘ Who is that 
man walking across the open country towards us?’ When the servant answered, ‘ It
is my master,’ she took her veil and covered herself. 66 The servant related to
Isaac all that had happened. 67 Isaac conducted her into the tent and took her
as his wife. So she became his wife, and he loved her and was consoled for the
death of his mother. 

25:1 Abraham married another wife, whose name was Keturah. 2 She bore
him Zimran, Jokshan, Medan, Midian, Ishbak, and Shuah. 3 Jokshan became the
father of Sheba and Dedan. The descendants of Dedan were the Asshurim, Letushim,
and Leummim, 4 and the sons of Midian were Ephah, Epher, Enoch, Abida, and
Eldaah. All these were descendants of Keturah. 

 25:5 Abraham had assigned all that he possessed to Isaac; 6 and he had
already in his lifetime made gifts to his sons by his concubines and had sent
them away eastwards, to a land of the east, out of his son Isaac’s way. 7
Abraham had lived for a hundred and seventy-five years 8 when he breathed his
last. He died at a great age, a full span of years, and was gathered to his
forefathers. 9 His sons, Isaac and Ishmael, buried him in the cave at
Machpelah, on the land of Ephron son of Zohar the Hittite, east of Mamre, 10
the plot which Abraham had bought from the Hittites. There Abraham was buried
with his wife Sarah. 11 After the death of Abraham, God blessed his son Isaac,
who settled close by Beer-lahai-roi.

25:12 This is the table of the descendants of Abraham’s son Ishmael, whom
Hagar the Egyptian, Sarah’s slave-girl, bore to him. 13 These are the names of
the sons of Ishmael listed in order of their birth: Nebaioth, Ishmael's eldest
son, then Kedar, Adbeel, Mibsam, 14 Mishma, Dumah, Massa, 15 Hadad, Tema,
Jetur, Naphish, and Kedemah. 16 These are the sons of Ishmael, after whom their
hamlets and encampments were named, twelve princes according to their tribes.
17 Ishmael had lived for a hundred and thirty-seven years when he breathed his
last. So he died and was gathered to his forefathers. 18 Ishmael's sons
inhabited the land from Havilah to Shur, which is east of Egypt on the way to
Asshur; he himself had settled to the east of his brothers. 

25:19 This is an account of the descendants of Abraham's son Isaac.
Isaac's father was Abraham. 20 When Isaac was forty years old he married
Rebecca daughter of Bethuel, the Aramaean from Paddan-aram and sister of Laban
the Aramaean. 21 Isaac appealed to the Lord on behalf of his wife because she
was childless; the Lord gave heed to his entreaty, and Rebecca conceived. 22
The children pressed on each other in her womb, and she said, ‘ If all is well,
why am I like this?’ She went to seek guidance of the Lord, 23 who said to her:
‘ Two nations are in your womb, two peoples going their own ways from birth. One
will be stronger than the other; the elder will be servant to the younger.’ 24
When her time had come, there were indeed twins in her womb. 25 The first to
come out was reddish and covered with hairs like a cloak, and they named him
Esau. 26 Immediately afterwards his brother was born with his hand grasping
Esau's heel, and he was given the name Jacob. Isaac was sixty years old when
they were born. 27 As the boys grew up, Esau became a skilful hunter, an
outdoor man, while Jacob lived quietly among the tents. 28 Isaac favoured Esau
because he kept him supplied with game, but Rebecca favoured Jacob. 29 One day
Jacob was preparing broth when Esau came in from the country, exhausted. 30 He
said to Jacob, ‘ I am exhausted; give me a helping of that red broth.’ This is
why he was called Edom. 31 Jacob retorted, ‘ Not till you sell me your rights as
the firstborn.’ 32 Esau replied, ‘ Here I am at death’s door; what use is a
birthright to me?’ 33 Jacob said, ‘ First give me your oath!’ So he gave him his
oath and sold his birthright to Jacob. 34 Then Jacob gave Esau bread and some
lentil broth, and he ate and drank and went his way. Esau showed by this how
little he valued his birthright. 

 26:1 The land was stricken by a famine — not the earlier famine which
happened in Abraham's time — and Isaac went to Abimelech the Philistine king at
Gerar. 2 The Lord appeared to Isaac and said, ‘ Do not go down to Egypt, but
stay in this country as I bid you. 3 Stay here and I shall be with you and
bless you, for to you and to your descendants I shall give all these lands, so 
fulfilling the oath which I swore to your father Abraham. 4 I shall make your
descendants as numerous as the stars in the heavens, and give them all these
lands. All the nations of the earth will wish to be blessed as they are blessed,
5 because Abraham obeyed me and kept my charge, my commandments, statutes, and
laws.’

26:6 Isaac settled in Gerar, and, 7 when the men of the place asked
questions about his wife, he told them that she was his sister, for he was
afraid to say Rebecca was his wife, in case they murdered him because of her;
for she was very beautiful. 8 But when they had been there some considerable
time, Abimelech the Philistine king looked down from his window and there was
Isaac caressing his wife Rebecca. 9 He summoned Isaac and said, ‘ So she is your
wife! What made you say she was your sister?’ Isaac answered, ‘ I thought I
should be put to death because of her.’ 10 Abimelech said, ‘ Why have you
treated us like this? One of the people might easily have lain with your wife,
and then you would have made us incur guilt.’ 11 Abimelech warned all the
people that whoever harmed this man or his wife would be put to death. 

26:12 Isaac sowed seed in that land, and the same year he reaped a
hundredfold. The Lord had blessed him, 13 and he became more and more wealthy,
until he was very prosperous indeed. 14 He had flocks and herds and many
slaves, so that the Philistines were envious of him. 15 They stopped up and
filled with earth all the wells dug by the slaves in the days of Isaac's father
Abraham. 18 Isaac reopened the wells which were dug in the lifetime of his
father Abraham and stopped up by the Philistines after his death. He called them
by the names which his father had given them.

 26:16 Then Abimelech said to him, ‘ Go, leave us; you have become too
powerful for us.’ 17 When Isaac left that place, he encamped in the wadi of
Gerar, and stayed there. 19 Then Isaac's slaves dug in the wadi and found a
spring of running water, 20 but the shepherds of Gerar quarrelled with Isaac's
shepherds, claiming the water as theirs. He called the well Esek, because they
made difficulties for him. 21 His men then dug another well, but a quarrel
arose over that also, so he called it Sitnah. 22 He moved on from there and dug
another well; over that there was no dispute, so he called it Rehoboth, saying,
‘ Now the Lord has given us room and our people will become more numerous in the
land.’

26:23 From there Isaac went up country to Beersheba; 24 that same night
the Lord appeared to him. ‘ I am the God of your father Abraham,’ he said; ‘ I am
with you, so do not be afraid. I shall bless you and give you many descendants
for the sake of my servant Abraham.’ 25 Isaac built an altar there and invoked
the Lord by name. He pitched his tent, and there also his slaves dug a well.

 26:26 Abimelech came to him from Gerar with Ahuzzath his friend and
Phicol the commander of his army. 27 Isaac said to them, ‘ Why have you come
here to me? You were ill-disposed towards me and sent me away from your midst.’
28 They answered, ‘ We have realized that the Lord is with you, and we propose
that the two of us should bind each other by oath and make a pact. 29 You are
to do us no harm, just as we have in no way molested you. We were always ready
to do you a good turn and we let you go away peaceably. Now the Lord has
prospered you.’ 30 Isaac then gave a feast for them, and they ate and drank.
31 Early next morning they exchanged oaths, and after Isaac bade them farewell,
they parted from him in peace. 32 The same day Isaac's slaves came and told him
about a well they had dug: ‘ We have found water,’ they told him. 33 He named
the well Shibah; this is why the city is called Beersheba to this day. 

26:34 When Esau was forty years old he married Judith daughter of Beeri
the Hittite, and Basemath daughter of Elon the Hittite; 35 this was a source of
bitter grief to Isaac and Rebecca.

27:1 When Isaac grew old and his eyes had become so dim that he could not
see, he called for his elder son Esau.  ‘ My son!’ he said. Esau answered, ‘ Here I
am.’ 2 Isaac said, ‘ Listen now: I am old and I do not know when I may die. 3 
Take your hunting gear, your quiver and bow, and go out into the country and get
me some game. 4 Then make me a savoury dish, the kind I like, and bring it for
me to eat so that I may give you my blessing before I die.’ 

27:5 Now Rebecca had been listening as Isaac talked to his son Esau. When
Esau went off into the country to hunt game for his father, 6 she said to her
son Jacob, ‘ I have just overheard your father say to your brother Esau, 7
“Bring me some game and make a savoury dish for me to eat so that I may bless
you in the presence of the Lord before I die.” 8 Listen now to me, my son, and
do what I tell you. 9 Go to the flock and pick me out two fine young kids, and
I shall make them into a savoury dish for your father, the kind he likes. 10
Then take it in to your father to eat so that he may bless you before he dies.’
11 ‘ But my brother Esau is a hairy man,’ Jacob said to his mother Rebecca, ‘ and
my skin is smooth. 12 Suppose my father touches me; he will know that I am
playing a trick on him and I shall bring a curse instead of a blessing on
myself.’ 13 His mother answered, ‘ Let any curse for you fall on me, my son. Do
as I say; go and fetch me the kids.’ 14 So Jacob went and got them and brought
them to his mother, who made them into a savoury dish such as his father liked.
15 Rebecca then took her elder son’s clothes, Esau’s best clothes which she had
by her in the house, and put them on Jacob her younger son. 16 She put the
goatskins on his hands and on the smooth nape of his neck. 17 Then she handed
to her son Jacob the savoury dish and the bread she had made.

27:18 He went in to his father and said, ‘ Father!’ Isaac answered, ‘ Yes,
my son; which are you?’ 19 Jacob answered, ‘ I am Esau, your elder son. I have
done as you told me. Come, sit up and eat some of the game I have for you and
then give me your blessing.’ 20 Isaac said, ‘ How did you find it so quickly, my
son?’ Jacob answered, ‘ Because the Lord your God put it in my way.’ 21 Isaac
then said to Jacob, ‘ Come close and let me touch you, my son, to make sure that
you are my son Esau.’ 22 When Jacob came close to his father, Isaac felt him
and said, ‘ The voice is Jacob’s voice, but the hands are the hands of Esau.’ 23
He did not recognize him, because his hands were hairy like Esau's, and so he
blessed him. 

27:24 He asked, ‘ Are you really my son Esau?’ and when he answered, ‘ Yes,
I am,’ 25 Isaac said, ‘ Bring me some of the game to eat, my son, so that I may
give you my blessing.’ Jacob brought it to him, and he ate; he brought him wine
also, and he drank it. 26 Then his father said to him, ‘ Come near, my son, and
kiss me.’ 27 So he went near and kissed him, and when Isaac smelt the smell of
his clothes, he blessed him and said, ‘ The smell of my son is like the smell of
open country blessed by the Lord. 28 ‘ God give you dew from heaven and the
richness of the earth, corn and new wine in plenty! 29 May peoples serve you
and nations bow down to you. May you be lord over your brothers, and may your
mother’s sons bow down to you. A curse on those who curse you, but a blessing on
those who bless you!’ 30 Isaac finished blessing Jacob, who had scarcely left
his father’s presence when his brother Esau came in from hunting. 31 He too
prepared a savoury dish and brought it to his father. He said, ‘ Come, father,
eat some of the game I have for you, and then give me your blessing.’ 32 ‘ Who
are you?’ his father Isaac asked him. ‘ I am Esau, your elder son,’ he replied.
33 Then Isaac, greatly agitated, said, ‘ Then who was it that hunted game and
brought it to me? I ate it just before you came in, and I blessed him, and the
blessing will stand.’ 34 When Esau heard this, he lamented loudly and bitterly.
‘ Father, bless me too,’ he begged. 35 But Isaac said, ‘ Your brother came full
of deceit and took your blessing.’ 36 ‘ He is not called Jacob for nothing,’
said Esau. ‘ This is the second time he has supplanted me. He took away my right
as the firstborn, and now he has taken away my blessing. Have you kept back any
blessing for me?’ 37 Isaac answered, ‘ I have made him lord over you and set all
his brothers under him. I have bestowed upon him grain and new wine for his
sustenance. What is there left that I can do for you, my son?’ 38 Esau asked,
‘ Had you then only one blessing, father? Bless me, too, my father.’ Esau wept
bitterly, 39 and his father Isaac answered: ‘ Your dwelling will be far from the
richness of the earth, far from the dew of heaven above. 40 By your sword you
will live, and you will serve your brother. But the time will come when you grow
restive and break his yoke from your neck.’ 41 Esau harboured a grudge against 
Jacob because of the blessing which his father had given him, and he said to
himself, ‘ The time of mourning for my father will soon be here; then I am going
to kill my brother Jacob.’ 42 When Rebecca was told what her elder son Esau was
planning, she called Jacob, her younger son, and said to him, ‘ Your brother Esau
is threatening to kill you. 43 Now, my son, listen to me. Be off at once to my
brother Laban in Harran, 44 and stay with him for a while until your brother’s
anger cools. 45 When it has died down and he has forgotten what you did to him,
I will send and fetch you back. Why should I lose you both in one day?’ 

27:46 Rebecca said to Isaac, ‘ I am weary to death of Hittite women! If
Jacob marries a Hittite woman like those who live here, my life will not be
worth living.’ 

28:1 So Isaac called Jacob, and after blessing him, gave him these
instructions: ‘ You are not to marry a Canaanite woman. 2 Go now to the home of
Bethuel, your mother's father, in Paddan-aram, and there find a wife, one of the
daughters of Laban, your mother’s brother. 3 May God Almighty bless you; may he
make you fruitful and increase your descendants until they become a community of
nations. 4 May he bestow on you and your offspring the blessing given to
Abraham, that you may possess the land where you are now living, and which God
assigned to Abraham!’ 5 Then Isaac sent Jacob away, and he went to Paddan-aram
to Laban, son of Bethuel the Aramaean and brother of Rebecca, the mother of
Jacob and Esau.

28:6 Esau learnt that Isaac had given Jacob his blessing and had sent him
away to Paddan-aram to find a wife there, that when he blessed him he had
forbidden him to marry a Canaanite woman, 7 and that Jacob had obeyed his
father and mother and gone to Paddan-aram. 8 Seeing that his father disliked
Canaanite women, 9 Esau went to Ishmael, and, in addition to his other wives,
married Mahalath sister of Nebaioth and daughter of Abraham's son Ishmael.

28:10 Jacob set out from Beersheba and journeyed towards Harran. 11 He
came to a certain shrine and, because the sun had gone down, he stopped for the
night. He took one of the stones there and, using it as a pillow under his head,
he lay down to sleep. 12 In a dream he saw a ladder, which rested on the ground
with its top reaching to heaven, and angels of God were going up and down on it.
13 The Lord was standing beside him saying, ‘ I am the Lord, the God of your
father Abraham and the God of Isaac. This land on which you are lying I shall
give to you and your descendants. 14 They will be countless as the specks of
dust on the ground, and you will spread far and wide, to west and east, to north
and south. All the families of the earth will wish to be blessed as you and your
descendants are blessed. 15 I shall be with you to protect you wherever you go,
and I shall bring you back to this land. I shall not leave you until I have done
what I have promised you.’ 

28:16 When Jacob woke from his sleep he said, ‘ Truly the Lord is in this
place, and I did not know it.’ 17 He was awestruck and said, ‘ How awesome is
this place! This is none other than the house of God; it is the gateway to
heaven.’ 18 Early in the morning, when Jacob awoke, he took the stone on which
his head had rested, and set it up as a sacred pillar, pouring oil over it. 19
He named that place Beth-el; but the earlier name of the town was Luz.

28:20 Jacob made this vow: ‘ If God will be with me, if he will protect me
on my journey and give me food to eat and clothes to wear, 21 so that I come
back safely to my father's house, then the Lord shall be my God, 22 and this
stone which I have set up as a sacred pillar shall be a house of God. And of all
that you give me, I shall allot a tenth part to you.’

29:1 Jacob, continuing his journey, came to the land of the eastern
tribes. 2 There he saw a well in the open country with three flocks of sheep
lying beside it, because flocks were watered from that well. Over its mouth was
a huge stone, 3 and all the herdsmen used to gather there and roll it off the
mouth of the well and water the flocks; then they would replace the stone over
the well. 4 Jacob said to them, ‘ Where are you from, my friends?’ ‘ We are from 
Harran,’ they replied. 5 He asked them if they knew Laban the grandson of
Nahor. They answered, ‘ Yes, we do.’ 6 ‘ Is he well?’ Jacob asked; and they
answered, ‘ Yes, he is well, and there is his daughter Rachel coming with the
flock.’ 7 Jacob said, ‘ It is still broad daylight, and not yet time for penning
the sheep. Water the flocks and then go and let them graze.’ 8 But they
replied, ‘ We cannot, until all the herdsmen have assembled and the stone has
been rolled away from the mouth of the well; then we can water our flocks.’ 9
While he was talking to them, Rachel arrived with her father’s flock, for she
was a shepherdess. 10 Immediately Jacob saw Rachel, the daughter of Laban his
mother’s brother, with Laban's flock, he went forward, rolled the stone off the
mouth of the well and watered Laban’s sheep. 11 He kissed Rachel, and was moved
to tears. 12 When he told her that he was her father’s kinsman, Rebecca’s son,
she ran and told her father. 13 No sooner had Laban heard the news of his
sister’s son Jacob, than he hurried to meet him, embraced and kissed him, and
welcomed him to his home. Jacob told Laban all that had happened, 14 and Laban
said, ‘ Yes, you are my own flesh and blood.’

After Jacob had stayed with him for a whole month, 15 Laban said to him, ‘ Why
should you work for me for nothing simply because you are my kinsman? Tell me
what wage you would settle for.’ 16 Now Laban had two daughters: the elder was
called Leah, and the younger Rachel. 17 Leah was dull-eyed, but Rachel was
beautiful in both face and figure, and 18 Jacob had fallen in love with her. He
said, ‘ For your younger daughter Rachel I would work seven years.’ 19 Laban
replied, ‘ It is better that I should give her to you than to anyone else; stay
with me.’ 

29:20 When Jacob had worked seven years for Rachel, and they seemed like
a few days because he loved her, 21 he said to Laban, ‘ I have served my time.
Give me my wife that I may lie with her.’ 22 Laban brought all the people of
the place together and held a wedding feast. 23 In the evening he took his
daughter Leah and brought her to Jacob, and he lay with her. 24 At the same
time Laban gave his slave-girl Zilpah to his daughter Leah. 25 But when morning
came, there was Leah! Jacob said to Laban, ‘ What is this you have done to me? It
was for Rachel I worked. Why have you played this trick on me?’ 26 Laban
answered, ‘ It is against the custom of our country to marry off the younger
sister before the elder. 27 Go through with the seven days’ feast for the
elder, and the younger shall be given you in return for a further seven years’
work.’ 28 Jacob agreed, and completed the seven days for Leah.

Then Laban gave Jacob his daughter Rachel to be his wife; 29 and to serve
Rachel he gave his slave-girl Bilhah. 30 Jacob lay with Rachel also; he loved
her rather than Leah, and he worked for Laban for a further seven years. 31
When the Lord saw that Leah was unloved, he granted her a child, but Rachel
remained childless. 32 Leah conceived and gave birth to a son; and she called
him Reuben, for she said, ‘ The Lord has seen my humiliation, but now my husband
will love me.’ 33 Again she conceived and had a son and said, ‘ The Lord,
hearing that I am unloved, has given me this child also’; and she called him
Simeon. 34 She conceived again and had a son and said, ‘ Now that I have borne
him three sons my husband will surely be attached to me.’ So she called him
Levi. 35 Once more she conceived and had a son, and said, ‘ Now I shall praise
the Lord’; therefore she named him Judah. Then for a while she bore no more
children.


 30:1 When Rachel found that she bore Jacob no children, she became
jealous of her sister and complained to Jacob, ‘ Give me sons, or I shall die!’
2 Jacob said angrily to Rachel, ‘ Can I take the place of God, who has denied you
children?’ 3 ‘ Here is my slave-girl Bilhah,’ she replied. ‘ Lie with her, so
that she may bear sons to be laid upon my knees, and through her I too may build
up a family.’ 4 When she gave him her slave-girl Bilhah as a wife, Jacob lay
with her, 5 and she conceived and bore him a son. 6 Then Rachel said, ‘ God has
given judgement for me; he has indeed heard me and given me a son’; so she named
him Dan. 7 Rachel's slave-girl Bilhah conceived again and bore Jacob another
son. 8 Rachel said, ‘ I have devised a fine trick against my sister, and it has
succeeded’; so she named him Naphtali.

30:9 When Leah found that she had stopped bearing children, she took her
slave-girl Zilpah and gave her to Jacob as a wife, 10 and Zilpah,
Leah's slave-girl, bore Jacob a son. 11 Leah said, ‘ Good fortune has come,’ and she named
him Gad. 12 Zilpah bore Jacob another son, 13 and Leah said, ‘ Happiness has
come, for women will call me happy’; so she named him Asher. 

30:14 Once at the time of the wheat harvest when Reuben was out in the
open country he found some mandrakes and brought them to Leah his mother. Rachel
asked Leah for some of her son’s mandrakes, 15 but Leah said, ‘ Is it not enough
to have taken away my husband, that you should take these mandrakes as well?’
Rachel said, ‘ Very well, in exchange for your son's mandrakes let Jacob sleep
with you tonight.’ 16 In the evening, when Jacob came in from the country Leah
went out to meet him. ‘ You are to sleep with me tonight,’ she told him. ‘ I have
hired you with my son’s mandrakes.’ He slept with her that night, 17 and God
heard Leah’s prayer, so that she conceived and bore a fifth son to Jacob. 18
Leah said, ‘ God has rewarded me, because I gave my slave-girl to my husband’; so
she named him Issachar. 19 Leah conceived again and bore a sixth son. 20 She
said, ‘ God has endowed me with a noble dowry. Now my husband will honour me like
a princess, because I have borne him six sons’; so she named him Zebulun. 21
Later she bore a daughter whom she named Dinah. 22 Then God took thought for
Rachel; he heard her prayer and gave her a child. 23 After she conceived and
bore a son, she said, ‘ God has taken away my humiliation.’ 24 She named him
Joseph, saying, ‘ May the Lord add another son to me!’

30:25 After Rachel had given birth to Joseph, Jacob said to Laban, ‘ Send
me on my way, for I want to return to my own home and country. 26 Give me my
wives and children for whom I have served you, and I shall go; you know what
service I have rendered you.’ 27 Laban answered, ‘ I should like to say this—I
have become prosperous and the Lord has blessed me through you. 28 So now tell
me what wages I owe you, and I shall give you them.’ 29 ‘ You know how I have
served you,’ replied Jacob,  ‘ and how your herds have prospered under my care.
30 The few you had when I came have increased beyond measure, and wherever I
went the Lord brought you blessings. But is it not time for me to make provision
for my family?’ 31 Laban said, ‘ Then what shall I give you?’ ‘ Nothing at all,’
answered Jacob; ‘ I will tend your flocks and be in charge of them as before, if
you will do what I suggest. 32 I shall go through your flocks today and pick
out from them every black lamb, and all the brindled and the spotted goats, and
they will be my wages. 33 This is a fair offer, and it will be to my own
disadvantage later on, when we come to settling my wages: any goat amongst mine
that is not spotted or brindled and any lamb that is not black will have been
stolen.’ 34 Laban agreed: ‘ Let it be as you say.’

 30:35 But that same day Laban removed the he-goats that were striped and
brindled and all the spotted and brindled she-goats, all that had any white on
them, and every ram that was black, and he handed them over to his sons. 36
Then he put a distance of three days' journey between himself and Jacob, while
Jacob was tending the rest of Laban's flocks. 37 So Jacob took fresh rods of
poplar, almond, and plane trees, and peeled off strips of bark, exposing the
white of the rods. 38 He fixed the peeled rods upright in the troughs at the
watering-places where the flocks came to drink, so that they were facing the
she-goats that were in heat when they came to drink. 39 They mated beside the
rods and gave birth to young that were striped and spotted and brindled. 40 The
rams Jacob separated, and let the ewes run only with such of the rams in Laban's
flocks as were striped and black; and thus he built up flocks for himself, which
he did not add to Laban’s sheep. 41 As for the goats, whenever the more
vigorous were in heat, he set the rods in front of them at the troughs so that
they mated beside the rods. 42 He did not put them there for the weaker goats,
and in this way the weaker came to be Laban's and the stronger Jacob's. 43 So
Jacob's wealth increased more and more until he possessed great flocks, as well
as male and female slaves, camels, and donkeys.

31:1 Jacob learnt that Laban's sons were saying, ‘ Jacob has taken
everything that our father had, and all his wealth has come from our father’s 
property.’ 2 He noticed also that Laban was not so well disposed to him as he
had once been. 3 The Lord said to Jacob, ‘ Go back to the land of your fathers
and to your kindred; I shall be with you,’ 4 and Jacob sent word to Rachel and
Leah to come out to where his flocks were in the country. 5 He said to them, ‘ I
have been noticing that your father is not so friendly to me as once he was. But
the God of my father has been with me. 6 You yourselves know I have served your
father to the best of my ability, 7 yet he has cheated me and changed my wages
ten times over. But God did not let him do me any harm. 8 If your father said,
“The spotted ones are to be your wages,” then all the flock bore spotted young;
and if he said, “The striped ones are to be your wages,” then all the flock bore
striped young. 9 It is God who has taken away your father's livestock and given
them to me. 10 In the season when the flocks were in heat, I had a dream in
which I saw that the he-goats which were mating were striped and spotted and
dappled. 11 The angel of God called to me in the dream, “Jacob!” and I replied,
“Here I am!” 12 He said, “See what is happening: all the he-goats mating are
striped and spotted and dappled, for I have seen all that Laban has been doing
to you. 13 I am the God of Bethel where you anointed a sacred pillar and made a
vow to me. Now leave this country at once and return to your native land.”’ 14
Rachel and Leah answered him, ‘ We no longer have any share in our father's
house. 15 Does he not look on us as strangers, now that he has sold us and used
the money paid for us? 16 All the wealth which God has saved from our father’s
clutches is surely ours and our children’s. Now do whatever God has told you to
do.’ 17 At once Jacob put his sons and his wives on camels, 18 and he drove
off all the cattle and other livestock which he had acquired in Paddan-aram, to
go to his father Isaac in Canaan. 

31:19 When Laban had gone to shear his sheep, Rachel stole the household
gods belonging to her father. 20 Jacob hoodwinked Laban the Aramaean and kept
his departure secret; 21 he fled with all that he possessed, and soon was over
the Euphrates and on the way to the hill-country of Gilead. 22 Three days
later, when Laban heard that Jacob had fled, 23 he took his kinsmen with him
and pursued Jacob for seven days until he caught up with him in the hill-country
of Gilead. 24 But God came to Laban the Aramaean in a dream by night and said
to him, ‘ Be careful to say nothing to Jacob, not a word.’

31:25 When Laban caught up with him, Jacob had pitched his tent in the
hill-country of Gilead, and Laban encamped with his kinsmen in the same hillcountry.
26 Laban said to Jacob, ‘ What have you done? You have deceived me and
carried off my daughters as though they were captives taken in war. 27 Why did
you slip away secretly without telling me? I would have set you on your way with
songs and the music of tambourines and harps. 28 You did not even let me kiss
my daughters and their children. In this you behaved foolishly. 29 I have it in
my power to harm all of you, but last night the God of your father spoke to me;
he told me to be careful to say nothing to you, not one word. 30 I expect that
really you went away because you were homesick and pining for your father's
house; but why did you steal my gods?’

31:31 Jacob answered, ' I was afraid; I thought you would take your
daughters from me by force. 32 Whoever is found in possession of your gods
shall die for it. In the presence of our kinsmen as witnesses, identify anything
I have that is yours, and take it back.’ Jacob did not know that Rachel had
stolen the gods. 33 Laban went into Jacob's tent and Leah's tent and that of
the two slave-girls, but he found nothing. After coming from Leah's tent he went
into Rachel’s. 34 In the mean time Rachel had taken the household gods and put
them in the camel-bag and was sitting on them. Laban went through the whole tent
but found nothing. 35 Rachel said, ‘ Do not take it amiss, father, that I cannot
rise in your presence: the common lot of woman is upon me.’ So for all his
searching, Laban did not find the household gods. 

31:36 Jacob heatedly took Laban to task. ‘ What have I done wrong?’ he
exclaimed. ‘ What is my offence, that you have come after me in hot pursuit 37
and have gone through all my belongings? Have you found a single article
belonging to your household? If so, set it here in front of my kinsmen and
yours, and let them decide between the two of us. 38 In all the twenty years I 
have been with you, your ewes and she-goats have never miscarried. I have never
eaten rams from your flocks. 39 I have never brought to you the carcass of any
animal mangled by wild beasts, but I bore the loss myself. You demanded that I
should pay compensation for anything stolen by day or by night. 40 This was the
way of it: the heat wore me down by day and the frost by night; I got no sleep.
41 For twenty years I have been in your household. I worked fourteen years for
you to win your two daughters and six years for your flocks, and you changed my
wages ten times over. 42 If the God of my father, the God of Abraham and the
Fear of Isaac, had not been with me, you would now have sent me away emptyhanded.
But God saw my labour and my hardships, and last night he delivered his
verdict.’

31:43 Laban answered Jacob, ‘ The daughters are my daughters, the children
are my children, the flocks are my flocks; all you see is mine. But what am I to
do now about my daughters and the children they have borne? 44 Come, let us
make a pact, you and I, and let there be a witness between us.’ 45 So Jacob
chose a great stone and set it up as a sacred pillar. 46 Then he told his
kinsmen to gather stones, and they took them and built a cairn, and there beside
the cairn they ate together. 47 Laban called it Jegar-sahadutha, and Jacob
called it Gal-ed. 48 ‘ This cairn', said Laban, ‘ is a witness today between you
and me.’ That was why it was named Gal-ed; 49 it was also named Mizpah, for
Laban said, ‘ May the Lord watch between you and me when we are absent from one
another. 50 If you ill-treat my daughters or take other wives besides them,
then though no one is there as a witness, God will be the witness between us.’ 

31:43 Laban said to Jacob, ‘ Here is this cairn, and here the pillar which
I have set up between us. 52 Both cairn and pillar are witnesses that I am not
to pass beyond this cairn to your side with evil intent, and you must not pass
beyond this cairn and this pillar to my side with evil intent. 53 May the God
of Abraham and the God of Nahor judge between us.’ Jacob swore this oath in the
name of the Fear of Isaac, the God of his father. 54 He slaughtered an animal
for sacrifice there in the hill-country, and summoned his kinsmen to the feast.
They ate together and spent the night there. 

 31:51 Laban said to Jacob, ‘ Here is this cairn, and here the pillar which
I have set up between us. 52 Both cairn and pillar are witnesses that I am not
to pass beyond this cairn to your side with evil intent, and you must not pass
beyond this cairn and this pillar to my side with evil intent. 53 May the God
of Abraham and the God of Nahor judge between us.’ Jacob swore this oath in the
name of the Fear of Isaac, the God of his father. 54 He slaughtered an animal
for sacrifice there in the hill-country, and summoned his kinsmen to the feast.
They ate together and spent the night there. 

31:55 Laban rose early in the morning, kissed his daughters and their
children, gave them his blessing, and then returned to his home. 

32:1 As Jacob continued his journey he was met by angels of God. 2 When
he saw them, Jacob exclaimed, ‘ This is the company of God,’ and he called that
place Mahanaim. 

32:3 Jacob sent messengers ahead of him to his brother Esau to the
district of Seir in Edomite territory, 4 instructing them to say to Esau, ‘ My
lord, your servant Jacob sends this message: I have been living with Laban and
have stayed there till now. 5 I have acquired oxen, donkeys, and sheep, as well
as male and female slaves, and I am sending to tell you this, my lord, so that I
may win your favour.’ 6 The messengers returned to Jacob and said, ‘ We went to
your brother Esau and he is already on the way to meet you with four hundred
men.’ 7 Jacob, much afraid and distressed, divided the people with him, as well
as the sheep, cattle, and camels, into two companies. 8 He reasoned that, if
Esau should come upon one company and destroy it, the other might still survive.

32:9 Jacob prayed, ‘ God of my father Abraham, God of my father Isaac,
Lord at whose bidding I came back to my own country and to my kindred, and who
promised me prosperity, 10 I am not worthy of all the true and steadfast love
which you have shown to me your servant. The last time I crossed the Jordan, I
owned nothing but the staff in my hand; now I have two camps. 11 Save me, I
pray, from my brother Esau, for I am afraid that he may come and destroy me; he
will spare neither mother nor child. 12 But you said, “I shall make you prosper
and your descendants will be like the sand of the sea, beyond all counting.”’

32:13 After spending the night there Jacob chose a gift for his brother
Esau from the herds he had with him: 14 two hundred she-goats, twenty he-goats,
two hundred ewes and twenty rams, 15 thirty milch-camels with their young, 
forty cows and ten young bulls, twenty she-donkeys and ten donkeys. 16 He put
each drove into the charge of a servant and said, ‘ Go on ahead of me, and leave
gaps between one drove and the next.’ 17 To the first servant he gave these
instructions: ‘ When my brother Esau meets you and asks who your master is and
where you are going and who owns these animals you are driving, 18 you are to
say, “They belong to your servant Jacob, who sends them as a gift to my lord
Esau; he himself is coming behind us.”’ 19 He gave the same instructions to the
second, to the third, and to all the drovers, telling each to say the same thing
to Esau when they met him. 20 And they were to add, ‘ Your servant Jacob is
coming behind us.’ Jacob thought, ‘ I shall appease him with the gift that I have
sent on ahead, and afterwards, when we come face to face, perhaps he will
receive me kindly.’ 21 So Jacob's gift went on ahead of him, while he himself
stayed that night at Mahaneh.

 32:22 During the night Jacob rose, and taking his two wives, his two
slave-girls, and his eleven sons, he crossed the ford of Jabbok. 23 After he
had sent them across the wadi with all that he had, 24 Jacob was left alone,
and a man wrestled with him there till daybreak. 25 When the man saw that he
could not get the better of Jacob, he struck him in the hollow of his thigh, so
that Jacob's hip was dislocated as they wrestled. 26 The man said, ‘ Let me go,
for day is breaking,’ but Jacob replied, ‘ I will not let you go unless you bless
me.’ 27 The man asked, ‘ What is your name?’ ‘ Jacob,’ he answered. 28 The man
said, ‘ Your name shall no longer be Jacob but Israel, because you have striven
with God and with mortals, and have prevailed.’ 29 Jacob said, ‘ Tell me your
name, I pray.’ He replied, ‘Why do you ask my name?’ but he gave him his
blessing there. 30 Jacob called the place Peniel, ‘ because’, he said, ‘ I have
seen God face to face yet my life is spared’. 31 The sun rose as Jacob passed
through Penuel, limping because of his hip. 32 That is why to this day the
Israelites do not eat the sinew that is on the hollow of the thigh, because the
man had struck Jacob on that sinew. 

 33:1 Jacob looked up and there was Esau coming with four hundred men. He
divided the children between Leah and Rachel and the two slave-girls. 2 He put
the slave-girls and their children in front, Leah with her children next, and
Rachel and Joseph in the rear. 3 He himself went on ahead of them, bowing low
to the ground seven times as he approached his brother. 4 Esau ran to meet him
and embraced him; he threw his arms round him and kissed him, and they both
wept. 5 When Esau caught sight of the women and children, he asked, ‘ Who are
these with you?’ Jacob replied, ‘ The children whom God has graciously given to
your servant.’ 6 The slave-girls came near, each with her children, and they
bowed low; 7 then Leah with her children came near and bowed low, and lastly
Joseph and Rachel came and bowed low also. 8 Esau asked, ‘ What was all that
company of yours that I met?’ ‘ It was meant to win favour with you, my lord,’
was the answer. 9 Esau said, ‘ I have more than enough. Keep what you have, my
brother.’ 10 But Jacob replied, ‘ No, please! If I have won your favour, then
accept, I pray, this gift from me; for, as you see, I come into your presence as
into that of a god, and yet you receive me favourably. 11 Accept this gift
which I bring you; for God has been gracious to me, and I have all I want.’ Thus
urged, Esau accepted it. 

33:12 Esau said, ‘ Let us set out, and I shall go at your pace.’ 13 But
Jacob answered him, ‘ You must know, my lord, that the children are small; the
flocks and herds are suckling their young and I am concerned for them, and if
they are overdriven for a single day, my beasts will all die. 14 I beg you, my
lord, to go on ahead, and I shall move by easy stages at the pace of the
livestock I am driving and the pace of the children, until I come to my lord in
Seir.’ 15 Esau said, ‘ Let me detail some of my men to escort you,’ but he
replied, ‘ There is no reason why my lord should be so kind.’ 16 That day Esau
turned back towards Seir, 17 while Jacob set out for Succoth; there he built
himself a house and made shelters for his cattle. Therefore he named that place
Succoth. 

33:18 So having journeyed from Paddan-aram, Jacob arrived safely at the
town of Shechem in Canaan and pitched his tent to the east of it. 19 The piece 
of land where he had pitched his tent he bought from the sons of Hamor,
Shechem's father, for a hundred sheep. 20 He erected an altar there and called
it El-elohey-israel.

34:1 Dinah, the daughter whom Leah had borne to Jacob, went out to visit
women of the district, 2 and Shechem, son of Hamor the Hivite, the local
prince, saw her. He took her, lay with her, and violated her. 3 But Shechem was
deeply attached to Jacob’s daughter Dinah; he loved the girl and sought to win
her affection. 4 Shechem said to Hamor his father, ‘ You must get me this girl
as my wife.’ 5 When Jacob learnt that his daughter Dinah had been dishonoured,
his sons were with the herds in the open country, so he held his peace until
they came home. 6 Meanwhile Shechem’s father Hamor came out to Jacob to talk
the matter over with him. 7 When they heard the news Jacob’s sons came home
from the country; they were distressed and very angry, because in lying with
Jacob’s daughter Shechem had done what the Israelites hold to be an intolerable
outrage. 8 Hamor appealed to them: ‘ My son Shechem is in love with this girl; I
beg you to let him have her as his wife. 9 Let us ally ourselves in marriage;
you give us your daughters, and you take ours. 10 If you settle among us, the
country is open before you; make your home in it, move about freely, and acquire
land of your own.’ 11 Shechem said to the girl's father and brothers, ‘ I am
eager to win your favour and I shall give whatever you ask.
12 Fix the brideprice and the gift as high as you like, and I shall give whatever you ask; only,
give me the girl in marriage.’

34:13 Jacob's sons replied to Shechem and his father Hamor deceitfully,
because Shechem had violated their sister Dinah: 14 ‘ We cannot do this,’ they
said; ‘ we cannot give our sister to a man who is uncircumcised, for we look on
that as a disgrace. 15 Only on one condition can we give our consent: if you
follow our example and have every male among you circumcised, 16 we shall give
you our daughters and take yours for ourselves. We will then live among you, and
become one people with you. 17 But if you refuse to listen to us and be
circumcised, we shall take the girl and go.’ 18 Their proposal appeared
satisfactory to Hamor and his son Shehem; 19 and the young man, who was held
in respect above anyone in his father's house, did not hesitate to do what they
had said, because his heart had been captured by Jacob’s daughter. 

