An Animal of No Significance

ABOUT 13.5 BILLION YEARS AGO, MATTER, energy, time and space
came into being in what is known as the Big Bang.

The story of these fundamental features of our universe is called physics.

About 300,000 years after their appearance, matter and energy started
to coalesce into complex structures, called atoms, which then combined
into molecules. The story of atoms, molecules and their interactions is
called chemistry.

About 3.8 billion years ago, on a planet called Earth, certain molecules
combined to form particularly large and intricate structures called
organisms. The story of organisms is called biology.

About 70,000 years ago, organisms belonging to the species Homo
sapiens started to form even more elaborate structures called cultures.
The subsequent development of these human cultures is called history.

    physics -> chemistry -> biology -> history

Three important revolutions shaped the course of history:
    - the Cognitive Revolution kick - started history about 70,000 years ago.
    - The Agricultural Revolution sped it up about 12,000 years ago.
    - The Scientific Revolution, which got under way only 500 years ago, may well end
history and start something completely different.

This book tells the story of how these three revolutions have affected humans
and their fellow organisms.

There were humans long before there was history. Animals much like
modern humans first appeared about 2.5 million years ago. But for
countless generations they did not stand out from the myriad other
organisms with which they shared their habitats.

On a hike in East Africa 2 million years ago, you might well have
encountered a familiar cast of human characters: anxious mothers
cuddling their babies and clutches of carefree children playing in the
mud; temperamental youths chafing against the dictates of society and
weary elders who just wanted to be left in peace; chest-thumping
machos trying to impress the local beauty and wise old matriarchs who
had already seen it all. 

These archaic humans loved, played, formed
close friendships and competed for status and power – but so did
chimpanzees, baboons and elephants. There was nothing special about them.
Nobody, least of all humans themselves, had any inkling that their
descendants would one day walk on the moon, split the atom, fathom
the genetic code and write history books. The most important thing to
know about prehistoric humans is that they were insignificant animals
with no more impact on their environment than gorillas, fireflies or
jellyfish.

Biologists classify organisms into species. Animals are said to belong
to the same species if they tend to mate with each other, giving birth to
fertile offspring. Horses and donkeys have a recent common ancestor
and share many physical traits. But they show little sexual interest in
one another. They will mate if induced to do so – but their offspring,
called mules, are sterile. Mutations in donkey DNA can therefore never
cross over to horses, or vice versa. The two types of animals are
consequently considered two distinct species, moving along separate
evolutionary paths. By contrast, a bulldog and a spaniel may look very
different, but they are members of the same species, sharing the same
DNA pool. They will happily mate and their puppies will grow up to pair
off with other dogs and produce more puppies.

Species that evolved from a common ancestor are bunched together
under the heading ‘genus’ (plural genera). Lions, tigers, leopards and
jaguars are different species within the genus Panthera. Biologists label
organisms with a two-part Latin name, genus followed by species. Lions,
for example, are called Panthera leo, the species leo of the genus
Panthera. Presumably, everyone reading this book is a Homo sapiens – the
species sapiens (wise) of the genus Homo (man).

Genera in their turn are grouped into families, such as the cats (lions,
cheetahs, house cats), the dogs (wolves, foxes, jackals) and the elephants
(elephants, mammoths, mastodons).

All members of a family trace their lineage back to a founding matriarch or patriarch.

All cats, for example, from the smallest house kitten to the most ferocious lion,
share a common feline ancestor who lived about 25 million years ago.

Homo sapiens, too, belongs to a family. This banal fact used to be one
of history’s most closely guarded secrets. Homo sapiens long preferred to
view itself as set apart from animals, an orphan bereft of family, lacking
siblings or cousins, and most importantly, without parents. But that’s
just not the case. Like it or not, we are members of a large and
particularly noisy family called the great apes. Our closest living
relatives include chimpanzees, gorillas and orangutans. The
chimpanzees are the closest. Just 6 million years ago, a single female ape
had two daughters. One became the ancestor of all chimpanzees, the
other is our own grandmother.

Skeletons in the Closet
Homo sapiens has kept hidden an even more disturbing secret. Not only
do we possess an abundance of uncivilised cousins, once upon a time we
had quite a few brothers and sisters as well. We are used to thinking
about ourselves as the only humans, because for the last 10,000 years,
our species has indeed been the only human species around.

Yet the real meaning of the word human is ‘an animal belonging to the genus Homo’,
and there used to be many other species of this genus besides Homo
sapiens. Moreover, as we shall see in the last chapter of the book, in the
not so distant future we might again have to contend with non-sapiens
humans. To clarify this point, I will often use the term ‘Sapiens’ to
denote members of the species Homo sapiens, while reserving the term
‘human’ to refer to all extant members of the genus Homo.

Humans first evolved in East Africa about 2.5 million years ago from
an earlier genus of apes called Australopithecus, which means ‘Southern
Ape’. About 2 million years ago, some of these archaic men and women
left their homeland to journey through and settle vast areas of North
Africa, Europe and Asia. Since survival in the snowy forests of northern
Europe required different traits than those needed to stay alive in
Indonesia’s steaming jungles, human populations evolved in different
directions. The result was several distinct species, to each of which
scientists have assigned a pompous Latin name.

Humans in Europe and western Asia evolved into Homo Neanderthalensis 
(‘Man from the Neander Valley), popularly referred to simply as ‘Neanderthals’.

Neanderthals, bulkier and more muscular than us Sapiens, were well adapted
to the cold climate of Ice Age western Eurasia. The more eastern regions of Asia
were populated by Homo erectus, ‘Upright Man’, who survived there for close to 2 million years,
making it the most durable human species ever. This record is unlikely
to be broken even by our own species. It is doubtful whether Homo
sapiens will still be around a thousand years from now, so 2 million years
is really out of our league.

On the island of Java, in Indonesia, lived Homo soloensis, ‘Man from
the Solo Valley’, who was suited to life in the tropics. On another
Indonesian island – the small island of Flores – archaic humans
underwent a process of dwarfing. Humans first reached Flores when the
sea level was exceptionally low, and the island was easily accessible
from the mainland. When the seas rose again, some people were trapped
on the island, which was poor in resources. Big people, who need a lot of
food, died first. Smaller fellows survived much better. Over the
generations, the people of Flores became dwarves.

This unique species,
known by scientists as Homo floresiensis, reached a maximum height of
only one metre and weighed no more than twenty-five kilograms. They
were nevertheless able to produce stone tools, and even managed
occasionally to hunt down some of the island’s elephants – though, to be
fair, the elephants were a dwarf species as well.

In 2010 another lost sibling was rescued from oblivion, when
scientists excavating the Denisova Cave in Siberia discovered a fossilised
finger bone. Genetic analysis proved that the finger belonged to a
previously unknown human species, which was named Homo denisova.

Who knows how many lost relatives of ours are waiting to be discovered
in other caves, on other islands, and in other climes.
While these humans were evolving in Europe and Asia, evolution in
East Africa did not stop. The cradle of humanity continued to nurture
numerous new species, such as Homo rudolfensis, ‘Man from Lake
Rudolf’, Homo ergaster, ‘Working Man’, and eventually our own species,
which we’ve immodestly named Homo sapiens, ‘Wise Man’.

The members of some of these species were massive and others were
dwarves. Some were fearsome hunters and others meek plant-gatherers.
Some lived only on a single island, while many roamed over continents.
But all of them belonged to the genus Homo. They were all human
beings.

It’s a common fallacy to envision these species as arranged in a
straight line of descent, with Ergaster begetting Erectus, Erectus
begetting the Neanderthals, and the Neanderthals evolving into us.

This linear model gives the mistaken impression that at any particular
moment only one type of human inhabited the earth, and that all earlier
species were merely older models of ourselves. The truth is that from
about 2 million years ago until around 10,000 years ago, the world was
home, at one and the same time, to several human species. And why
not? Today there are many species of foxes, bears and pigs. The earth of
a hundred millennia ago was walked by at least six different species of
man. It’s our current exclusivity, not that multi-species past, that is
peculiar – and perhaps incriminating. As we will shortly see, we Sapiens
have good reasons to repress the memory of our siblings.

The Cost of Thinking
Despite their many differences, all human species share several defining
characteristics. Most notably, humans have extraordinarily large brains
compared to other animals. Mammals weighing sixty kilograms have an
average brain size of 200 cubic centimetres. The earliest men and
women, 2.5 million years ago, had brains of about 600 cubic
centimetres. Modern Sapiens sport a brain averaging 1,200–1,400 cubic
centimetres. Neanderthal brains were even bigger.
That evolution should select for larger brains may seem to us like,
well, a no - brain er. We are so enamoured of our high intelligence that we
assume that when it comes to cerebral power, more must be better. But
if that were the case, the feline family would also have produced cats
who could do calculus. Why is genus Homo the only one in the entire
animal kingdom to have come up with such massive thinking machines?

The fact is that a jumbo brain is a jumbo drain on the body. It’s not
easy to carry around, especially when encased inside a massive skull. It’s
even harder to fuel. In Homo sapiens, the brain accounts for about 2–3
per cent of total body weight, but it consumes 25 per cent of the body’s
energy when the body is at rest. By comparison, the brains of other apes
require only 8 per cent of rest - time energy. Archaic humans paid for
their large brains in two ways. Firstly, they spent more time in search of
food. Secondly, their muscles atrophied. Like a government diverting
money from defence to education, humans diverted energy from biceps
to neurons. It’s hardly a foregone conclusion that this is a good strategy
for survival on the savannah. A chimpanzee can’t win an argument with
a Homo sapiens, but the ape can rip the man apart like a rag doll.
Today our big brains pay off nicely, because we can produce cars and
guns that enable us to move much faster than chimps, and shoot them
from a safe distance instead of wrestling. But cars and guns are a recent
phenomenon. For more than 2 million years, human neural networks
kept growing and growing, but apart from some flint knives and pointed
sticks, humans had precious little to show for it. What then drove
forward the evolution of the massive human brain during those 2 million
years? Frankly, we don’t know.

Another singular human trait is that we walk upright on two legs.
Standing up, it’s easier to scan the savannah for game or enemies, and
arms that are unnecessary for locomotion are freed for other purposes,
like throwing stones or signalling. The more things these hands could do,
the more successful their owners were, so evolutionary pressure brought
about an increasing concentration of nerves and finely tuned muscles in
the palms and fingers. As a result, humans can perform very intricate
tasks with their hands. In particular, they can produce and use
sophisticated tools. The first evidence for tool production dates from
about 2.5 million years ago, and the manufacture and use of tools are
the criteria by which archaeologists recognise ancient humans.
Yet walking upright has its downside. The skeleton of our primate
ancestors developed for millions of years to support a creature that
walked on all fours and had a relatively small head. Adjusting to an
upright position was quite a challenge, especially when the scaffolding
had to support an extra - large cranium. Humankind paid for its lofty
vision and industrious hands with backaches and stiff necks.
Women paid extra. An upright gait required narrower hips,
constricting the birth canal – and this just when babies’ heads were
getting bigger and bigger. Death in childbirth became a major hazard for
human females. Women who gave birth earlier, when the infants brain
and head were still relatively small and supple, fared better and lived to
have more children. Natural selection consequently favoured earlier
births. And, indeed, compared to other animals, humans are born
prematurely, when many of their vital systems are still underdeveloped.
A colt can trot shortly after birth; a kitten leaves its mother to forage on
its own when it is just a few weeks old. Human babies are helpless,
dependent for many years on their elders for sustenance, protection and
education.

This fact has contributed greatly both to humankind’s extraordinary
social abilities and to its unique social problems. Lone mothers could
hardly forage enough food for their offspring and themselves with needy
children in tow. Raising children required constant help from other
family members and neighbours. It takes a tribe to raise a human.
Evolution thus favoured those capable of forming strong social ties. In
addition, since humans are born underdeveloped, they can be educated
and socialised to a far greater extent than any other animal. Most
mammals emerge from the womb like glazed earthenware emerging
from a kiln – any attempt at remoulding will scratch or break them.
Humans emerge from the womb like molten glass from a furnace. They
can be spun, stretched and shaped with a surprising degree of freedom.
This is why today we can educate our children to become Christian or
Buddhist, capitalist or socialist, warlike or peace - loving.

We assume that a large brain, the use of tools, superior learning abilities
and complex social structures are huge advantages. It seems self - evident
that these have made humankind the most powerful animal on earth.
But humans enjoyed all of these advantages for a full 2 million years
during which they remained weak and marginal creatures. Thus humans
who lived a million years ago, despite their big brains and sharp stone
tools, dwelt in constant fear of predators, rarely hunted large game, and
subsisted mainly by gathering plants, scooping up insects, stalking small
animals, and eating the carrion left behind by other more powerful
carnivores.

One of the most common uses of early stone tools was to crack open
bones in order to get to the marrow. Some researchers believe this was
our original niche. Just as woodpeckers specialise in extracting insects
from the trunks of trees, the first humans specialised in extracting
marrow from bones. Why marrow? Well, suppose you observe a pride of
lions take down and devour a giraffe. You wait patiently until they’re
done. But it’s still not your turn because first the hyenas and jackals –
and you don’t dare interfere with them scavenge the leftovers. Only then
would you and your band dare approach the carcass, look cautiously left
and right – and dig into the edible tissue that remained.

This is a key to understanding our history and psychology. Genus
Homo’s position in the food chain was, until quite recently, solidly in the
middle. For millions of years, humans hunted smaller creatures and
gathered what they could, all the while being hunted by larger
predators. It was only 400,000 years ago that several species of man
began to hunt large game on a regular basis, and only in the last
100,000 years – with the rise of Homo sapiens – that man jumped to the
top of the food chain.

That spectacular leap from the middle to the top had enormous
consequences. Other animals at the top of the pyramid, such as lions and
sharks, evolved into that position very gradually, over millions of years.
This enabled the ecosystem to develop checks and balances that prevent
lions and sharks from wreaking too much havoc. As lions became
deadlier, so gazelles evolved to run faster, hyenas to cooperate better,
and rhinoceroses to be more bad-tempered. In contrast, humankind
ascended to the top so quickly that the ecosystem was not given time to
adjust. Moreover, humans themselves failed to adjust. Most top
predators of the planet are majestic creatures. Millions of years of
dominion have filled them with self - confidence. Sapiens by contrast is
more like a banana republic dictator. Having so recently been one of the
underdogs of the savannah, we are full of fears and anxieties over our
position, which makes us doubly cruel and dangerous. Many historical
calamities, from deadly wars to ecological catastrophes, have resulted
from this over - hasty jump.

A Race of Cooks
A significant step on the way to the top was the domestication of fire.
Some human species may have made occasional use of fire as early as
800,000 years ago. By about 300,000 years ago, Homo erectus,
Neanderthals and the forefathers of Homo sapiens were using fire on a
daily basis. Humans now had a dependable source of light and warmth,
and a deadly weapon against prowling lions. Not long afterwards,
humans may even have started deliberately to torch their
neighbourhoods. A carefully managed fire could turn impassable barren
thickets into prime grasslands teeming with game. In addition, once the
fire died down, Stone Age entrepreneurs could walk through the
smoking remains and harvest charcoaled animals, nuts and tubers.
But the best thing fire did was cook. Foods that humans cannot digest
in their natural forms – such as wheat, rice and potatoes – became
staples of our diet thanks to cooking. Fire not only changed food’s
chemistry, it changed its biology as well. Cooking killed germs and
parasites that infested food. Humans also had a far easier time chewing
and digesting old favourites such as fruits, nuts, insects and carrion if
they were cooked. Whereas chimpanzees spend five hours a day chewing
raw food, a single hour suffices for people eating cooked food.

The advent of cooking enabled humans to eat more kinds of food, to
devote less time to eating, and to make do with smaller teeth and shorter
intestines. Some scholars believe there is a direct link between the
advent of cooking, the shortening of the human intestinal track, and the
growth of the human brain. Since long intestines and large brains are
both massive energy consumers, it’s hard to have both. By shortening the
intestines and decreasing their energy consumption, cooking
inadvertently opened the way to the jumbo brains of Neanderthals and
Sapiens.

Fire also opened the first significant gulf between man and the other
animals. The power of almost all animals depends on their bodies: the
strength of their muscles, the size of their teeth, the breadth of their
wings. Though they may harness winds and currents, they are unable to
control these natural forces, and are always constrained by their physical
design. Eagles, for example, identify thermal columns rising from the
ground, spread their giant wings and allow the hot air to lift them
upwards. Yet eagles cannot control the location of the columns, and
their maximum carrying capacity is strictly proportional to their
wingspan.

When humans domesticated fire, they gained control of an obedient
and potentially limitless force. Unlike eagles, humans could choose when
and where to ignite a flame, and they were able to exploit fire for any
number of tasks. Most importantly, the power of fire was not limited by
the form, structure or strength of the human body. A single woman with
a flint or fire stick could burn down an entire forest in a matter of hours.
The domestication of fire was a sign of things to come.

Our Brothers’ Keepers
Despite the benefits of fire, 150,000 years ago humans were still
marginal creatures. They could now scare away lions, warm themselves
during cold nights, and burn down the occasional forest. Yet counting all
species together, there were still no more than perhaps a million humans
living between the Indonesian archipelago and the Iberian peninsula, a
mere blip on the ecological radar.

Our own species, Homo sapiens, was already present on the world
stage, but so far it was just minding its own business in a corner of
Africa. We don’t know exactly where and when animals that can be
classified as Homo sapiens first evolved from some earlier type of
humans, but most scientists agree that by 150,000 years ago, East Africa
was populated by Sapiens that looked just like us. If one of them turned
up in a modern morgue, the local pathologist would notice nothing
peculiar. Thanks to the blessings of fire, they had smaller teeth and jaws
than their ancestors, whereas they had massive brains, equal in size to
ours.
Scientists also agree that about 70,000 years ago, Sapiens from East
Africa spread into the Arabian peninsula, and from there they quickly
overran the entire Eurasian landmass.

When Homo sapiens landed in Arabia, most of Eurasia was already
settled by other humans. What happened to them? There are two
conflicting theories. The ‘Interbreeding Theory’ tells a story of attraction,
sex and mingling. As the African immigrants spread around the world,
they bred with other human populations, and people today are the
outcome of this interbreeding.

For example, when Sapiens reached the Middle East and Europe, they
encountered the Neanderthals. These humans were more muscular than
Sapiens, had larger brains, and were better adapted to cold climes. They
used tools and fire, were good hunters, and apparently took care of their
sick and infirm. (Archaeologists have discovered the bones of
Neanderthals who lived for many years with severe physical handicaps,
evidence that they were cared for by their relatives.) Neanderthals are
often depicted in caricatures as the archetypical brutish and stupid ‘cave
people’, but recent evidence has changed their image.

According to the Interbreeding Theory, when Sapiens spread into
Neanderthal lands, Sapiens bred with Neanderthals until the two
populations merged. If this is the case, then today’s Eurasians are not
pure Sapiens. They are a mixture of Sapiens and Neanderthals. Similarly,
when Sapiens reached East Asia, they interbred with the local Erectus, so
the Chinese and Koreans are a mixture of Sapiens and Erectus.
The opposing view, called the ‘Replacement Theory’ tells a very
different story – one of incompatibility, revulsion, and perhaps even
genocide. According to this theory, Sapiens and other humans had
different anatomies, and most likely different mating habits and even
body odours. They would have had little sexual interest in one another.
And even if a Neanderthal Romeo and a Sapiens Juliet fell in love, they
could not produce fertile children, because the genetic gulf separating
the two populations was already unbridgeable. The two populations
remained completely distinct, and when the Neanderthals died out, or
were killed off, their genes died with them. According to this view,
Sapiens replaced all the previous human populations without merging
with them. If that is the case, the lineages of all contemporary humans
can be traced back, exclusively, to East Africa, 70,000 years ago. We are
all ‘pure Sapiens’.

A lot hinges on this debate. From an evolutionary perspective, 70,000
years is a relatively short interval. If the Replacement Theory is correct,
all living humans have roughly the same genetic baggage, and racial
distinctions among them are negligible. But if the Interbreeding Theory
is right, there might well be genetic differences between Africans,
Europeans and Asians that go back hundreds of thousands of years. This
is political dynamite, which could provide material for explosive racial
theories.

In recent decades the Replacement Theory has been the common
wisdom in the field. It had firmer archaeological backing, and was more
politically correct (scientists had no desire to open up the Pandora’s box
of racism by claiming significant genetic diversity among modern human
populations). But that ended in 2010, when the results of a four-year
effort to map the Neanderthal genome were published. Geneticists were
able to collect enough intact Neanderthal DNA from fossils to make a
broad comparison between it and the DNA of contemporary humans.
The results stunned the scientific community.

It turned out that 1–4 per cent of the unique human DNA of modern
populations in the Middle East and Europe is Neanderthal DNA. That’s
not a huge amount, but it’s significant. A second shock came several
months later, when DNA extracted from the fossilised finger from
Denisova was mapped. The results proved that up to 6 per cent of the
unique human DNA of modern Melanesians and Aboriginal Australians is
Denisovan DNA.

If these results are valid – and it’s important to keep in mind that
further research is under way and may either reinforce or modify these
conclusions – the Interbreeders got at least some things right. But that
doesn’t mean that the Replacement Theory is completely wrong. Since
Neanderthals and Denisovans contributed only a small amount of DNA
to our present-day genome, it is impossible to speak of a ‘merger’
between Sapiens and other human species. Although differences between
them were not large enough to completely prevent fertile intercourse,
they were sufficient to make such contacts very rare.

How then should we understand the biological relatedness of Sapiens,
Neanderthals and Denisovans? Clearly, they were not completely
different species like horses and donkeys. On the other hand, they were
not just different populations of the same species, like bulldogs and
spaniels. Biological reality is not black and white. There are also
important grey areas. Every two species that evolved from a common
ancestor, such as horses and donkeys, were at one time just two
populations of the same species, like bulldogs and spaniels. There must
have been a point when the two populations were already quite different
from one another, but still capable on rare occasions of having sex and
producing fertile offspring. Then another mutation severed this last
connecting thread, and they went their separate evolutionary ways.

It seems that about 50,000 years ago, Sapiens, Neanderthals and
Denisovans were at that borderline point. They were almost, but not
quite, entirely separate species. As we shall see in the next chapter,
Sapiens were already very different from Neanderthals and Denisovans
not only in their genetic code and physical traits, but also in their
cognitive and social abilities, yet it appears it was still just possible, on
rare occasions, for a Sapiens and a Neanderthal to produce a fertile
offspring. So the populations did not merge, but a few lucky Neanderthal
genes did hitch a ride on the Sapiens Express. It is unsettling – and
perhaps thrilling – to think that we Sapiens could at one time have sex
with an animal from a different species, and produce children together.

But if the Neanderthals, Denisovans and other human species didn’t
merge with Sapiens, why did they vanish? One possibility is that Homo
sapiens drove them to extinction. Imagine a Sapiens band reaching a
Balkan valley where Neanderthals had lived for hundreds of thousands
of years. The newcomers began to hunt the deer and gather the nuts and
berries that were the Neanderthals’ traditional staples. Sapiens were
more proficient hunters and gatherers – thanks to better technology and
superior social skills – so they multiplied and spread. The less
resourceful Neanderthals found it increasingly difficult to feed
themselves. Their population dwindled and they slowly died out, except
perhaps for one or two members who joined their Sapiens neighbours.

Another possibility is that competition for resources flared up into
violence and genocide. Tolerance is not a Sapiens trademark. In modern
times, a small difference in skin colour, dialect or religion has been
enough to prompt one group of Sapiens to set about exterminating
another group. Would ancient Sapiens have been more tolerant towards
an entirely different human species? It may well be that when Sapiens
encountered Neanderthals, the result was the first and most significant
ethnic - cleansing campaign in history.

Whichever way it happened, the Neanderthals (and the other human
species) pose one of history’s great what ifs. Imagine how things might
have turned out had the Neanderthals or Denisovans survived alongside
Homo sapiens. What kind of cultures, societies and political structures
would have emerged in a world where several different human species
coexisted? How, for example, would religious faiths have unfolded?
Would the book of Genesis have declared that Neanderthals descend
from Adam and Eve, would Jesus have died for the sins of the
Denisovans, and would the Qur’an have reserved seats in heaven for all
righteous humans, whatever their species? Would Neanderthals have
been able to serve in the Roman legions, or in the sprawling bureaucracy
of imperial China? Would the American Declaration of Independence
hold as a self-evident truth that all members of the genus Homo are
created equal? Would Karl Marx have urged workers of all species to
unite?

Over the past 10,000 years, Homo sapiens has grown so accustomed to
being the only human species that it’s hard for us to conceive of any
other possibility. Our lack of brothers and sisters makes it easier to
imagine that we are the epitome of creation, and that a chasm separates
us from the rest of the animal kingdom. When Charles Darwin indicated
that Homo sapiens was just another kind of animal, people were
outraged. Even today many refuse to believe it. Had the Neanderthals
survived, would we still imagine ourselves to be a creature apart?
Perhaps this is exactly why our ancestors wiped out the Neanderthals.
They were too familiar to ignore, but too different to tolerate.

Whether Sapiens are to blame or not, no sooner had they arrived at a
new location than the native population became extinct. The last
remains of Homo soloensis are dated to about 50,000 years ago. Homo
denisova disappeared shortly thereafter. Neanderthals made their exit
roughly 30,000 years ago. The last dwarf - like humans vanished from
Flores Island about 12,000 years ago. They left behind some bones, stone
tools, a few genes in our DNA and a lot of unanswered questions. They
also left behind us, Homo sapiens, the last human species.

What was the Sapiens’ secret of success? How did we manage to settle
so rapidly in so many distant and ecologically different habitats? How
did we push all other human species into oblivion? Why couldn’t even
the strong, brainy, cold-proof Neanderthals survive our onslaught? The
debate continues to rage. The most likely answer is the very thing that
makes the debate possible: Homo sapiens conquered the world thanks
above all to its unique language.

The Tree of Knowledge
IN THE PREVIOUS CHAPTER WE SAW THAT although Sapiens had
already populated East Africa 150,000 years ago, they began to overrun
the rest of planet Earth and drive the other human species to extinction
only about 70,000 years ago. In the intervening millennia, even though
these archaic Sapiens looked just like us and their brains were as big as
ours, they did not enjoy any marked advantage over other human
species, did not produce particularly sophisticated tools, and did not
accomplish any other special feats.

In fact, in the first recorded encounter between Sapiens and
Neanderthals, the Neanderthals won. About 100,000 years ago, some
Sapiens groups migrated north to the Levant, which was Neanderthal
territory, but failed to secure a firm footing. It might have been due to
nasty natives, an inclement climate, or unfamiliar local parasites.
Whatever the reason, the Sapiens eventually retreated, leaving the
Neanderthals as masters of the Middle East.

This poor record of achievement has led scholars to speculate that the
internal structure of the brains of these Sapiens was probably different
from ours. They looked like us, but their cognitive abilities – learning,
remembering, communicating – were far more limited. Teaching such an
ancient Sapiens English, persuading him of the truth of Christian dogma,
or getting him to understand the theory of evolution would probably
have been hopeless undertakings. Conversely, we would have had a very
hard time learning his language and understanding his way of thinking

But then, beginning about 70,000 years ago, Homo sapiens started
doing very special things. Around that date Sapiens bands left Africa for
a second time. This time they drove the Neanderthals and all other
human species not only from the Middle East, but from the face of the
earth. Within a remarkably short period, Sapiens reached Europe and
East Asia. About 45,000 years ago, they somehow crossed the open sea
and landed in Australia – a continent hitherto untouched by humans.
The period from about 70,000 years ago to about 30,000 years ago
witnessed the invention of boats, oil lamps, bows and arrows and
needles (essential for sewing warm clothing). The first objects that can
reliably be called art date from this era (see the Stadel lion-man on this
page), as does the first clear evidence for religion, commerce and social
stratification.

Most researchers believe that these unprecedented accomplishments
were the product of a revolution in Sapiens’ cognitive abilities. They
maintain that the people who drove the Neanderthals to extinction,
settled Australia, and carved the Stadel lion-man were as intelligent,
creative and sensitive as we are. If we were to come across the artists of
the Stadel Cave, we could learn their language and they ours. We’d be
able to explain to them everything we know – from the adventures of
Alice in Wonderland to the paradoxes of quantum physics – and they
could teach us how their people view the world.

The appearance of new ways of thinking and communicating, between
70,000 and 30,000 years ago, constitutes the Cognitive Revolution. What
caused it? We’re not sure. The most commonly believed theory argues
that accidental genetic mutations changed the inner wiring of the brains
of Sapiens, enabling them to think in unprecedented ways and to
communicate using an altogether new type of language. We might call it
the Tree of Knowledge mutation. Why did it occur in Sapiens DNA rather
than in that of Neanderthals? It was a matter of pure chance, as far as
we can tell. But it’s more important to understand the consequences of
the Tree of Knowledge mutation than its causes. What was so special
about the new Sapiens language that it enabled us to conquer the world?

It was not the first language. Every animal has some kind of language.
Even insects, such as bees and ants, know how to communicate in
sophisticated ways, informing one another of the whereabouts of food.
Neither was it the first vocal language. Many animals, including all ape
and monkey species, have vocal languages. For example, green monkeys
use calls of various kinds to communicate. Zoologists have identified one
call that means, ‘Careful! An eagle!’ A slightly different call warns,
‘Careful! A lion!’ When researchers played a recording of the first call to
a group of monkeys, the monkeys stopped what they were doing and
looked upwards in fear. When the same group heard a recording of the
second call, the lion warning, they quickly scrambled up a tree. Sapiens
can produce many more distinct sounds than green monkeys, but whales
and elephants have equally impressive abilities. A parrot can say
anything Albert Einstein could say, as well as mimicking the sounds of
phones ringing, doors slamming and sirens wailing. Whatever advantage
Einstein had over a parrot, it wasn’t vocal. What, then, is so special
about our language?

The most common answer is that our language is amazingly supple.
We can connect a limited number of sounds and signs to produce an
infinite number of sentences, each with a distinct meaning. We can
thereby ingest, store and communicate a prodigious amount of
information about the surrounding world. A green monkey can yell to its
comrades, ‘Careful! A lion!’ But a modern human can tell her friends that
this morning, near the bend in the river, she saw a lion tracking a herd
of bison. She can then describe the exact location, including the different
paths leading to the area. With this information, the members of her
band can put their heads together and discuss whether they ought to
approach the river in order to chase away the lion and hunt the bison.

A second theory agrees that our unique language evolved as a means
of sharing information about the world. But the most important
information that needed to be conveyed was about humans, not about
lions and bison. Our language evolved as a way of gossiping. According
to this theory Homo sapiens is primarily a social animal. Social
cooperation is our key for survival and reproduction. It is not enough for
individual men and women to know the whereabouts of lions and bison.
It’s much more important for them to know who in their band hates
whom, who is sleeping with whom, who is honest, and who is a cheat.

The amount of information that one must obtain and store in order to
track the ever - changing relationships of a few dozen individuals is
staggering. (In a band of fifty individuals, there are 1,225 one-on-one
relationships, and countless more complex social combinations.) All apes
show a keen interest in such social information, but they have trouble
gossiping effectively. Neanderthals and archaic Homo sapiens probably
also had a hard time talking behind each other’s backs – a much
maligned ability which is in fact essential for cooperation in large
numbers. The new linguistic skills that modern Sapiens acquired about
seventy millennia ago enabled them to gossip for hours on end. Reliable
information about who could be trusted meant that small bands could
expand into larger bands, and Sapiens could develop tighter and more
sophisticated types of cooperation.

The gossip theory might sound like a joke, but numerous studies
support it. Even today the vast majority of human communication –
whether in the form of emails, phone calls or newspaper columns – is
gossip. It comes so naturally to us that it seems as if our language
evolved for this very purpose. Do you think that history professors chat
about the reasons for World War One when they meet for lunch, or that
nuclear physicists spend their coffee breaks at scientific conferences
talking about quarks? Sometimes. But more often, they gossip about the
professor who caught her husband cheating, or the quarrel between the
head of the department and the dean, or the rumours that a colleague
used his research funds to buy a Lexus. Gossip usually focuses on
wrongdoings. Rumour - mongers are the original fourth estate, journalists
who inform society about and thus protect it from cheats and
freeloaders.

Most likely, both the gossip theory and the there-is-a-lion-near-the-river
theory are valid. Yet the truly unique feature of our language is not its
ability to transmit information about men and lions. Rather, it’s the
ability to transmit information about things that do not exist at all. As
far as we know, only Sapiens can talk about entire kinds of entities that
they have never seen, touched or smelled.

Legends, myths, gods and religions appeared for the first time with the
Cognitive Revolution. Many animals and human species could previously
say, ‘Careful! A lion!’ Thanks to the Cognitive Revolution, Homo sapiens
acquired the ability to say, ‘The lion is the guardian spirit of our tribe.’
This ability to speak about fictions is the most unique feature of Sapiens
language.

It’s relatively easy to agree that only Homo sapiens can speak about
things that don’t really exist, and believe six impossible things before
breakfast. You could never convince a monkey to give you a banana by
promising him limitless bananas after death in monkey heaven. But why
is it important? After all, fiction can be dangerously misleading or
distracting. People who go to the forest looking for fairies and unicorns
would seem to have less chance of survival than people who go looking
for mushrooms and deer. And if you spend hours praying to non-existing
guardian spirits, aren’t you wasting precious time, time better spent
foraging, fighting and fornicating?

But fiction has enabled us not merely to imagine things, but to do so
collectively. We can weave common myths such as the biblical creation
story, the Dreamtime myths of Aboriginal Australians, and the
nationalist myths of modern states. Such myths give Sapiens the
unprecedented ability to cooperate flexibly in large numbers. Ants and
bees can also work together in huge numbers, but they do so in a very
rigid manner and only with close relatives. Wolves and chimpanzees
cooperate far more flexibly than ants, but they can do so only with small
numbers of other individuals that they know intimately. Sapiens can
cooperate in extremely flexible ways with countless numbers of
strangers. That’s why Sapiens rule the world, whereas ants eat our
leftovers and chimps are locked up in zoos and research laboratories.

The Legend of Peugeot
Our chimpanzee cousins usually live in small troops of several dozen
individuals. They form close friendships, hunt together and fight
shoulder to shoulder against baboons, cheetahs and enemy chimpanzees.
Their social structure tends to be hierarchical. The dominant member,
who is almost always a male, is termed the ‘alpha male’. Other males
and females exhibit their submission to the alpha male by bowing before
him while making grunting sounds, not unlike human subjects
kowtowing before a king. The alpha male strives to maintain social
harmony within his troop. When two individuals fight, he will intervene
and stop the violence. Less benevolently, he might monopolise
particularly coveted foods and prevent lower - ranking males from mating
with the females.

When two males are contesting the alpha position, they usually do so
by forming extensive coalitions of supporters, both male and female,
from within the group. Ties between coalition members are based on
intimate daily contact – hugging, touching, kissing, grooming and
mutual favours. Just as human politicians on election campaigns go
around shaking hands and kissing babies, so aspirants to the top position
in a chimpanzee group spend much time hugging, back - slapping and
kissing baby chimps. The alpha male usually wins his position not
because he is physically stronger, but because he leads a large and stable
coalition. These coalitions play a central part not only during overt
struggles for the alpha position, but in almost all day-to-day activities.
Members of a coalition spend more time together, share food, and help
one another in times of trouble.

There are clear limits to the size of groups that can be formed and
maintained in such a way. In order to function, all members of a group
must know each other intimately. Two chimpanzees who have never
met, never fought, and never engaged in mutual grooming will not know
whether they can trust one another, whether it would be worthwhile to
help one another, and which of them ranks higher. Under natural
conditions, a typical chimpanzee troop consists of about twenty to fifty
individuals. As the number of chimpanzees in a troop increases, the
social order destabilises, eventually leading to a rupture and the
formation of a new troop by some of the animals. Only in a handful of
cases have zoologists observed groups larger than a hundred. Separate
groups seldom cooperate, and tend to compete for territory and food.
Researchers have documented prolonged warfare between groups, and
even one case of ‘genocidal’ activity in which one troop systematically
slaughtered most members of a neighbouring band.

Similar patterns probably dominated the social lives of early humans,
including archaic Homo sapiens. Humans, like chimps, have social
instincts that enabled our ancestors to form friendships and hierarchies,
and to hunt or fight together. However, like the social instincts of
chimps, those of humans were adapted only for small intimate groups.
When the group grew too large, its social order destabilised and the
band split. Even if a particularly fertile valley could feed 500 archaic
Sapiens, there was no way that so many strangers could live together.

How could they agree who should be leader, who should hunt where, or
who should mate with whom?
In the wake of the Cognitive Revolution, gossip helped Homo sapiens
to form larger and more stable bands. But even gossip has its limits.
Sociological research has shown that the maximum ‘natural’ size of a
group bonded by gossip is about 150 individuals. Most people can
neither intimately know, nor gossip effectively about, more than 150
human beings.

Even today, a critical threshold in human organisations falls
somewhere around this magic number. Below this threshold,
communities, businesses, social networks and military units can
maintain themselves based mainly on intimate acquaintance and
rumour-mongering. There is no need for formal ranks, titles and law
books to keep order A platoon of thirty soldiers or even a company of a
hundred soldiers can function well on the basis of intimate relations,
with a minimum of formal discipline. A well - respected sergeant can
become ‘king of the company and exercise authority even over
commissioned officers. A small family business can survive and flourish
without a board of directors, a CEO or an accounting department.

But once the threshold of 150 individuals is crossed, things can no
longer work that way. You cannot run a division with thousands of
soldiers the same way you run a platoon. Successful family businesses
usually face a crisis when they grow larger and hire more personnel. If
they cannot reinvent themselves, they go bust.

How did Homo sapiens manage to cross this critical threshold,
eventually founding cities comprising tens of thousands of inhabitants
and empires ruling hundreds of millions? The secret was probably the
appearance of fiction. Large numbers of strangers can cooperate
successfully by believing in common myths.

Any large-scale human cooperation – whether a modern state, a
medieval church, an ancient city or an archaic tribe – is rooted in
common myths that exist only in peoples collective imagination.
Churches are rooted in common religious myths. Two Catholics who
have never met can nevertheless go together on crusade or pool funds to
build a hospital because they both believe that God was incarnated in
human flesh and allowed Himself to be crucified to redeem our sins.
States are rooted in common national myths. Two Serbs who have never
met might risk their lives to save one another because both believe in
the existence of the Serbian nation, the Serbian homeland and the
Serbian flag. Judicial systems are rooted in common legal myths. Two
lawyers who have never met can nevertheless combine efforts to defend
a complete stranger because they both believe in the existence of laws,
justice, human rights – and the money paid out in fees.

Yet none of these things exists outside the stories that people invent
and tell one another. There are no gods in the universe, no nations, no
money, no human rights, no laws, and no justice outside the common
imagination of human beings.

People easily understand that ‘primitives’ cement their social order by
believing in ghosts and spirits, and gathering each full moon to dance
together around the campfire. What we fail to appreciate is that our
modern institutions function on exactly the same basis. Take for example
the world of business corporations. Modern business-people and lawyers
are, in fact, powerful sorcerers. The principal difference between them
and tribal shamans is that modern lawyers tell far stranger tales. The
legend of Peugeot affords us a good example.

An icon that somewhat resembles the Stadel lion-man appears today on
cars, trucks and motorcycles from Paris to Sydney. It’s the hood
ornament that adorns vehicles made by Peugeot, one of the oldest and
largest of Europe’s carmakers. Peugeot began as a small family business
in the village of Valentigney, just 300 kilometres from the Stadel Cave.
Today the company employs about 200,000 people worldwide, most of
whom are complete strangers to each other. These strangers cooperate so
effectively that in 2008 Peugeot produced more than 1.5 million
automobiles, earning revenues of about 55 billion euros.

In what sense can we say that Peugeot SA (the company’s official
name) exists? There are many Peugeot vehicles, but these are obviously
not the company. Even if every Peugeot in the world were
simultaneously junked and sold for scrap metal, Peugeot SA would not
disappear. It would continue to manufacture new cars and issue its
annual report. The company owns factories, machinery and showrooms,
and employs mechanics, accountant s and secretaries, but all these
together do not comprise Peugeot. A disaster might kill every single one
of Peugeot’s employees, and go on to destroy all of its assembly lines and
executive offices. Even then, the company could borrow money, hire
new employees, build new factories and buy new machinery. Peugeot
has managers and shareholders, but neither do they constitute the
company. All the managers could be dismissed and all its shares sold,
but the company itself would remain intact.

It doesn’t mean that Peugeot SA is invulnerable or immortal. If a judge
were to mandate the dissolution of the company, its factories would
remain standing and its workers, accountants, managers and
shareholders would continue to live – but Peugeot SA would
immediately vanish. In short, Peugeot SA seems to have no essential
connection to the physical world. Does it really exist?

Peugeot is a figment of our collective imagination. Lawyers call this a
‘legal fiction’. It can’t be pointed at; it is not a physical object. But it
exists as a legal entity. Just like you or me, it is bound by the laws of the
countries in which it operates. It can open a bank account and own
property. It pays taxes, and it can be sued and even prosecuted
separately from any of the people who own or work for it.

Peugeot belongs to a particular genre of legal fictions called ‘limited
liability companies’. The idea behind such companies is among
humanity’s most ingenious inventions. Homo sapiens lived for untold
millennia without them. During most of recorded history property could
be owned only by flesh - and - blood humans, the kind that stood on two
legs and had big brains. If in thirteenth - century France Jean set up a
wagon - manufacturing workshop, he himself was the business. If a wagon
he’d made broke down a week after purchase, the disgruntled buyer
would have sued Jean personally. If Jean had borrowed 1,000 gold coins
to set up his workshop and the business failed, he would have had to
repay the loan by selling his private property – his house, his cow, his
land. He might even have had to sell his children into servitude. If he
couldn’t cover the debt, he could be thrown in prison by the state or
enslaved by his creditors. He was fully liable, without limit, for all
obligations incurred by his workshop.

If you had lived back then, you would probably have thought twice
before you opened an enterprise of your own. And indeed this legal
situation discouraged entrepreneurship. People were afraid to start new
businesses and take economic risks. It hardly seemed worth taking the
chance that their families could end up utterly destitute.

This is why people began collectively to imagine the existence of
limited liability companies. Such companies were legally independent of
the people who set them up, or invested money in them, or managed
them. Over the last few centuries such companies have become the main
players in the economic arena, and we have grown so used to them that
we forget they exist only in our imagination. In the US, the technical
term for a limited liability company is a ‘corporation’, which is ironic,
because the term derives from ‘corpus’ (‘body’ in Latin) – the one thing
these corporations lack. Despite their having no real bodies, the
American legal system treats corporations as legal persons, as if they
were flesh - and - blood human beings.

And so did the French legal system back in 1896, when Armand
Peugeot, who had inherited from his parents a metalworking shop that
produced springs, saws and bicycles, decided to go into the automobile
business. To that end, he set up a limited liability company. He named
the company after himself, but it was independent of him. If one of the
cars broke down, the buyer could sue Peugeot, but not Armand Peugeot.
If the company borrowed millions of francs and then went bust, Armand
Peugeot did not owe its creditors a single franc. The loan, after all, had
been given to Peugeot, the company, not to Armand Peugeot, the Homo
sapiens. Armand Peugeot died in 1915. Peugeot, the company, is still
alive and well.

How exactly did Armand Peugeot, the man, create Peugeot, the
company? In much the same way that priests and sorcerers have created
gods and demons throughout history, and in which thousands of French
cures were still creating Christ’s body every Sunday in the parish
churches. It all revolved around telling stories, and convincing people to
believe them. In the case of the French curés, the crucial story was that
of Christ’s life and death as told by the Catholic Church. According to
this story, if a Catholic priest dressed in his sacred garments solemnly
said the right words at the right moment, mundane bread and wine
turned into God’s flesh and blood. The priest exclaimed ‘Hoc est corpus
meum!’ (Latin for ‘This is my body!’) and hocus pocus – the bread turned
into Christ’s flesh. Seeing that the priest had properly and assiduously
observed all the procedures, millions of devout French Catholics behaved
as if God really existed in the consecrated bread and wine.

In the case of Peugeot SA the crucial story was the French legal code,
as written by the French parliament. According to the French legislators,
if a certified lawyer followed all the proper liturgy and rituals, wrote all
the required spells and oaths on a wonderfully decorated piece of paper,
and affixed his ornate signature to the bottom of the document, then
hocus pocus – a new company was incorporated. When in 1896 Armand
Peugeot wanted to create his company, he paid a lawyer to go through
all these sacred procedures. Once the lawyer had performed all the right
rituals and pronounced all the necessary spells and oaths, millions of
upright French citizens behaved as if the Peugeot company really
existed.

Telling effective stories is not easy. The difficulty lies not in telling the
story, but in convincing everyone else to believe it. Much of history
revolves around this question: how does one convince millions of people
to believe particular stories about gods, or nations, or limited liability
companies? Yet when it succeeds, it gives Sapiens immense power,
because it enables millions of strangers to cooperate and work towards
common goals. Just try to imagine how difficult it would have been to
create states, or churches, or legal systems if we could speak only about
things that really exist, such as rivers, trees and lions.

Over the years, people have woven an incredibly complex network of
stories. Within this network, fictions such as Peugeot not only exist, but
also accumulate immense power. The kinds of things that people create
through this network of stories are known in academic circles as
‘fictions’, ‘social constructs’, or ‘imagined realities’. An imagined reality
is not a lie. I lie when I say that there is a lion near the river when I
know perfectly well that there is no lion there. There is nothing special
about lies. Green monkeys and chimpanzees can lie. A green monkey, for
example, has been observed calling ‘Careful! A lion!’ when there was no
lion around. This alarm conveniently frightened away a fellow monkey
who had just found a banana, leaving the liar all alone to steal the prize
for itself.

Unlike lying, an imagined reality is something that everyone believes
in, and as long as this communal belief persists, the imagined reality
exerts force in the world. The sculptor from the Stadel Cave may
sincerely have believed in the existence of the lion-man guardian spirit.
Some sorcerers are charlatans, but most sincerely believe in the
existence of gods and demons. Most millionaires sincerely believe in the
existence of money and limited liability companies. Most human - rights
activists sincerely believe in the existence of human rights. No one was
lying when, in 2011, the UN demanded that the Libyan government
respect the human rights of its citizens, even though the UN, Libya and
human rights are all figments of our fertile imaginations.

Ever since the Cognitive Revolution, Sapiens has thus been living in a
dual reality. On the one hand, the objective reality of rivers, trees and
lions; and on the other hand, the imagined reality of gods, nations and
corporations. As time went by, the imagined reality became ever more
powerful, so that today the very survival of rivers, trees and lions
depends on the grace of imagined entities such as gods, nations and
corporations.

Bypassing the Genome
The ability to create an imagined reality out of words enabled large
numbers of strangers to cooperate effectively. But it also did something
more. Since large - scale human cooperation is based on myths, the way
people cooperate can be altered by changing the myths – by telling
different stories. Under the right circumstances myths can change
rapidly. In 1789 the French population switched almost overnight from
believing in the myth of the divine right of kings to believing in the
myth of the sovereignty of the people. Consequently, ever since the
Cognitive Revolution Homo sapiens has been able to revise its behaviour
rapidly in accordance with changing needs. This opened a fast lane of
cultural evolution, bypassing the traffic jams of genetic evolution.
Speeding down this fast lane, Homo sapiens soon far outstripped all other
human and animal species in its ability to cooperate.

The behaviour of other social animals is determined to a large extent
by their genes. DNA is not an autocrat. Animal behaviour is also
influenced by environmental factors and individual quirks. Nevertheless,
in a given environment, animals of the same species will tend to behave
in a similar way. Significant changes in social behaviour cannot occur, in
general, without genetic mutations. For example, common chimpanzees
have a genetic tendency to live in hierarchical groups headed by an
alpha male. Members of a closely related chimpanzee species, bonobos,
usually live in more egalitarian groups dominated by female alliances.
Female common chimpanzees cannot take lessons from their bonobo
relatives and stage a feminist revolution. Male chimps cannot gather in a
constitutional assembly to abolish the office of alpha male and declare
that from here on out all chimps are to be treated as equals. Such
dramatic changes in behaviour would occur only if something changed
in the chimpanzees’ DNA.

For similar reasons, archaic humans did not initiate any revolutions.
As far as we can tell, changes in social patterns, the invention of new
technologies and the settlement of alien habitats resulted from genetic
mutations and environmental pressures more than from cultural
initiatives. This is why it took humans hundreds of thousands of years to
make these steps. Two million years ago, genetic mutations resulted in
the appearance of a new human species called Homo erectus. Its
emergence was accompanied by the development of a new stone tool
technology, now recognised as a defining feature of this species. As long
as Homo erectus did not undergo further genetic alterations, its stone
tools remained roughly the same – for close to 2 million years!



