THE LEGEND
OF SLEEPY HOLLOW
by Washington Irving


Everyone believed that the valley of Sleepy Hollow
was haunted. But the one who believed it most
was Ichabod Crane. Ichabod lived in Sleepy
Hollow, and it was a good place for him, since he
loved to read about goblins and witches and to tell
frightening ghost stories.
Of course, Ichabod didn’t spend all his time thinking
about ghosts. He also thought about food. Even in school
he thought about it. He would often lose his place in a
book because his mind was on lunch instead of his work.
This wouldn't have been so unusual, except Ichabod was
the teacher!
One afternoon, Ichabod gave his class a problem in
arithmetic. Smacking his lips, he asked, “If you have six
cakes, three cakes and ten cakes, how many cakes do you

have?” The class set to work to find the answer. Ichabod
walked around with a stick in his hand to “help along”
any pupil who seemed lazy.
As the class was working, a young man rode up to the
school house door. “There’s a party at the Van Tassel farm
tonight,” he called to Ichabod. “And you're invited. Supper
is at eight o'clock.”
“Wonderful!” answered the school master. “Thank you
for the news!” He watched with excitement as the young
man rode off to invite the other guests. Then Ichabod
turned to his class.
“My dear children,” he beamed. “Is your work finished?”
He was so happy that he didn’t even whip the boy who
gave the wrong answer to the problem. In fact, he gave
the class the rest of the day off.
Ichabod rushed home to get ready for the big night
ahead. 


He hummed as he took a steaming hot bath, shined
his best shoes and carefully brushed his Sunday suit. He
spent half an hour just combing his hair. And as he stood
in front of the mirror, he thought about Katrina.
Beautiful Katrina! She was the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Van Tassel. How lovely she was, with her big brown eyes
and shining curls. And how rich! If only she would marry
him. Then they could sit at her parents’ wonderful dinner
table every single day!
Ichabod took a last look in the mirror. “What a handsome
fellow!” he said to the face in the glass. Then he went to
borrow a horse from the farmer in whose house he lived.

Soon Ichabod was bouncing up the road on the sagging
back of old Gunpowder, Farmer Brown’s gentlest horse.
People smiled as the pair rode by. “Crane is certainly the
right name for our good teacher,” one man chuckled. “He
looks just like that bird.”
It was true. Ichabod had a long, skinny neck and long,
skinny legs. His feet almost touched the ground as he
rode. His pointed elbows stuck out on either side. They
flapped up and down with Gunpowder’s every step. Even
the tail of Ichabod’s coat fluttered behind him like a bird’s
tail feathers!

In a short while, Ichabod reached the Van Tassel
farmhouse. Mr. Van Tassel met him at the door. “Welcome,
Master Crane,” said his host. “Come in and join the
others.”

Ichabod hurried inside, but he paid little attention to
the other guests. He simply couldn't take his eyes off the
food. Never had he seen such a table! When everyone sat
down to dinner, he was the first to reach for the heaping
bowls and platters. And each time his plate was empty,
he was talked into having “just a bit more.”
As everyone was eating, a noise like rolling thunder
was heard outside. No one was afraid, though. They knew
it was only young Brom Bones and his friends racing up
the road on their horses. Katrina ran to the door with a
blush. She waved shyly as Brom leaped off his horse.

Brom led his laughing friends into the house. They were
jolly, handsome young men. Brom bowed to Mr. and Mrs.
Van Tassel and winked at their pretty blond daughter. Then
he went to shake hands with the guests.
In less than a minute, Brom was telling a funny story.It
was about a trick he had played on a friend. The guests
laughed until tears ran down their cheeks. They loved to
hear Brom’s merry tales.

One guest, however, didn’t care for Brom’s tales at all.
Ichabod Crane only turned up his long nose at the
storyteller and yawned. He was sure Katrina didn’t like
Brom Bones either. Certainly she had smiled at Brom just
to be kind.

“After all,” thought Ichabod, “Brom is just a joker. But
I am a teacher! I've read three books all the way through.
And I can sing like a bird.” To prove it, he burst into song.
Ichabod’s voice rang through the room like a great bell—
a great bell with a great crack in it! People’s eyes popped
open in wonder at the noise. A few guests put their hands
over their ears. But Ichabod thought they were only
amazed at his wonderful talent.

Before long, someone began to play a fiddle. Ichabod
didn’t waste a moment. He was sure that he could dance
as well as he could sing. And how right he was! Ichabod led
Katrina to the middle of the floor and began to dance. His
body shook from head to toe. His arms waved like flapping
fans. He jumped from side to side and rolled his eyes.
Katrina laughed as she tried to keep up. But Brom Bones:
wasn’t laughing.

When the music stopped, Ichabod hurried to join some
guests near the fire. They were telling ghost stories, and
Ichabod dearly loved such tales.
“A strange woman in white appears in the grave yard
just before each big storm,” the blacksmith was saying.
“I tell you, I’ve seen her twice!”


Ichabod’s teeth began to chatter. Brom saw him and
smiled. The mayor’s wife went on. “I’m more afraid of the
Headless Horseman.”
“The Headless Horseman?” Ichabod asked in a weak
voice. “What's that?”

Brom spoke up. “The Headless Horseman is the ghost of
a soldier whose head was shot from his shoulders. Even
now,the ghost sometimes rides through the night in search
of his lost head.”

Ichabod shook from head to foot. He believed every word
of the story with all his heart.

Soon the party was over. Still shaking, Ichabod went to
say good night to Katrina. However, she turned away,
hardly noticing that he was there.

Poor Ichabod. Unhappily, he started his trip home on
Gunpowder. But as he rode through the dark night, a
strange feeling came over him. “How foolish,” he thought.
“There are no ghosts out here. | know better than to
believe in such things.” Still, unhappy as he was, he
couldn't get his mind off the tales he had heard—
especially the one about the Headless Horseman.
Suddenly Ichabod felt a chill up and down his back. Now
he really began to shake. He had a strong feeling that he
wasn't alone. His heart pounding, he looked to the left
and to the right. But he saw nothing unusual. Then he
stared up the road in front of him. All he could see was the
old church steeple, looking just the same as always. Still
trembling, he rode on.

Ichabod came to a small wooden bridge. Gunpowder set
one foot on it, then jerked to a sudden stop. Now Ichabod
heard a step behind him. He sat up in his saddle. Drops of
sweat stood out on his forehead. Slowly he turned his long
neck to peek at the road behind him. Something big and
black was standing in the darkness! It looked like a
monster ready to spring!

Ichabod almost fainted. The monster was a huge horse
and rider, not far behind. The teacher rubbed his eyes.
Then he let out a wild scream!

“The Headless Horseman!” he cried. “The Headless
Horseman is after me! Help! Somebody’” 

He dug his skinny
heels into Gunpowder’s ribs. The old farm horse gave a
leap and began to gallop wildly down the road.
“Faster! Faster!” cried Ichabod, his long legs kicking in
the air. He looked back to see if the Horseman had been
left behind. But no, the awful thing was even closer!
Ichabod shook as if he would fall apart. His teeth
chattered louder than Gunpowder’shoofs. He saw that

the ghost did have a head—butit was carrying its head
under its arm!
Now the Horseman started to swing its head around
and around in the air. Higher and higher it swungit, faster
and faster.
“No!” screamed Ichabod. “No! Don’t do it!” He dug his
heels deeper into Gunpowder’s sweating sides.
The old horse did his best to pick up speed. Up steep
hills and down deep valleys they raced. Sparks flew
through the night as Gunpowder's hoofs hit the stones.
 "Help! It's after me! It's after me!" Ichabod howled. He
looked back once more and gasped. The terrible thing was

only a few feet away!
Suddenly the Headless Horseman rushed forward. It
swung its head high in the air. Then it let go! Ichabod tried
to duck, but the head flew straight toward him! He
screamed with all his might.
“Y-A-A-A-a-a-a-a-a” he howled, as the head hit him
squarely in the back and brokeinto pieces. Ichabod threw
up his long arms and fell off Gunpowder’s back in a heap.
Downthe hill he tumbled, head over heels. Then he jumped
up. Still howling, he raced through the night, his arms
waving as he went. Faster and faster he ran, farther and
farther, until he was only a speck in the road.
From that night on, Ichabod Crane was never seen in
Sleepy Hollow again.
The next morning, a very tired old Gunpowderwasfound
eating grass at his master’s front gate. The farmer
wondered where Ichabod could be. So did the children
who stood by the schoolhouse door waiting for their
teacher. Many people looked for Ichabod, but he was not
to be found. What was found were the tracks of horses’
hoofs along the road from the Van Tassel farm. And not
far from the tracks was a broken pumpkin.
One of the men in the search party told Brom Bones
about the broken pumpkin. Brom burst out laughing asif
he had just heard the best joke of his life. And for years
after, even when he had been married to Katrina for a
very long time, Brom would laugh for hours if someone

just mentioned the word “pumpkin,” or the name of
Ichabod Crane.

