Atoms in Motion
1-1 Introduction
This two-year course in physics is presented from the point of view that you,
the reader, are going to be a physicist. This is not necessarily the case of course,
but that is what every professor in every subject assumes! If you are going to
be a physicist, you will have a lot to study: two hundred years of the most rapidly
developing field of knowledge that there is. So much knowledge, in fact, that
you might think that you cannot learn all of it in four years, and truly you cannot;
you will have to go to graduate school too!
Surprisingly enough, in spite of the tremendous amount of work that has been
done for all this time it is possible to condense the enormous mass of results to
a large extent—that is, to find laws which summarize all our knowledge. Even
so, the laws are so hard to grasp that it is unfair to you to start exploring this
tremendous subject without some kind of map or outline of the relationship of
one part of the subject of science to another. Following these preliminary remarks,
the first three chapters will therefore outline the relation of physics to the rest
of the sciences, the relations of the sciences to each other, and the meaning of
science, to help us develop a "feel" for the subject.
You might ask why we cannot teach physics by just giving the basic laws on
page one and then showing how they work in all possible circumstances, as we do
in Euclidean geometry, where we state the axioms and then make all sorts of deductions.
(So, not satisfied to learn physics in four years, you want to learn it in
four minutes?) We cannot do it in this way for two reasons. First, we do not yet
know all the basic laws: there is an expanding frontier of ignorance. Second, the
correct statement of the laws of physics involves some very unfamiliar ideas
which require advanced mathematics for their description. Therefore, one needs
a considerable amount of preparatory training even to learn what the words
mean. No, it is not possible to do it that way. We can only do it piece by piece.

Each piece, or part, of the whole of nature is always merely an approximation
to the complete truth, or the complete truth so far as we know it. In fact, everything
we know is only some kind of approximation, because we know that we do
not know all the laws as yet. Therefore, things must be learned only to be unlearned
again or, more likely, to be corrected.
The principle of science, the definition, almost, is the following: The test of
all knowledge is experiment. Experiment is the sole judge of scientific "truth."
But what is the source of knowledge? Where do the laws that are to be tested
come from? Experiment, itself, helps to produce these laws, in the sense that it
gives us hints. But also needed is imagination to create from these hints the great
generalizations—to guess at the wonderful, simple, but very strange patterns beneath
them all, and then to experiment to check again whether we have made the
right guess. This imagining process is so difficult that there is a division of labor
in physics: there are theoretical physicists who imagine, deduce, and guess at new
laws, but do not experiment; and then there are experimental physicists who experiment,
imagine, deduce, and guess.
We said that the laws of nature are approximate: that we first find the "wrong"
ones, and then we find the "right" ones. Now, how can an experiment be "wrong" ?
First, in a trivial way: if something is wrong with the apparatus that you did not
notice. But these things are easily fixed, and checked back and forth. So without
snatching at such minor things, how can the results of an experiment be wrong?
Only by being inaccurate. For example, the mass of an object never seems to

change; a spinning top has the same weight as a still one. So a "law" was invented:
mass is constant, independent of speed. That "law" is now found to be
incorrect. Mass is found to increase with velocity, but appreciable increases require
velocities near that of light. A true law is: if an object moves with a speed of
less than one hundred miles a second the mass is constant to within one part in
a million. In some such approximate form this is a correct law. So in practice
one might think that the new law makes no significant difference. Well, yes and
no. For ordinary speeds we can certainly forget it and use the simple constant - 
mass law as a good approximation. But for high speeds we are wrong, and the
higher the speed, the more wrong we are.
Finally, and most interesting, philosophically we are completely wrong with
the approximate law. Our entire picture of the world has to be altered even though
the mass changes only by a little bit. This is a very peculiar thing about the
philosophy, or the ideas, behind the laws. Even a very small effect sometimes
requires profound changes in our ideas.
Now, what should we teach first? Should we teach the correct but unfamiliar
law with its strange and difficult conceptual ideas, for example the theory of
relativity, four-dimensional space-time, and so on? Or should we first teach the
simple "constant-mass" law, which is only approximate, but does not involve such
difficult ideas? The first is more exciting, more wonderful, and more fun, but the
second is easier to get at first, and is a first step to a real understanding of the
second idea. This point arises again and again in teaching physics. At different
times we shall have to resolve it in different ways, but at each stage it is worth
learning what is now known, how accurate it is, how it fits into everything else,
and how it may be changed when we learn more.
Let us now proceed with our outline, or general map, of our understanding
of science today (in particular, physics, but also of other sciences on the periphery),
so that when we later concentrate on some particular point we will have some idea
of the background, why that particular point is interesting, and how it fits into
the big structure. So, what is our over - all picture of the world?

1-2 Matter is made of atoms
If, in some cataclysm, all of scientific knowledge were to be destroyed, and only
one sentence passed on to the next generations of creatures, what statement would
contain the most information in the fewest words? I believe it is the atomic
hypothesis (or the atomic fact, or whatever you wish to call it) that all things are
made of atoms — little particles that move around in perpetual motion, attracting
each other when they are a little distance apart, but repelling upon being squeezed
into one another. In that one sentence, you will see, there is an enormous amount
of information about the world, if just a little imagination and thinking are applied.
To illustrate the power of the atomic idea, suppose that we have a drop of
water a quarter of an inch on the side. If we look at it very closely we see nothing
but water — smooth, continuous water. Even if we magnify it with the best optical
microscope available — roughly two thousand times — then the water drop will be
roughly forty feet across, about as big as a large room, and if we looked rather
closely, we would still see relatively smooth water—but here and there small
football-shaped things swimming back and forth. Very interesting. These are
paramecia. You may stop at this point and get so curious about the paramecia
with their wiggling cilia and twisting bodies that you go no further, except perhaps
to magnify the paramecia still more and see inside. This, of course, is a subject
for biology, but for the present we pass on and look still more closely at the water
material itself, magnifying it two thousand times again. Now the drop of water
extends about fifteen miles across, and if we look very closely at it we see a kind
of teeming, something which no longer has a smooth appearance—it looks something
like a crowd at a football game as seen from a very great distance. In order
to see what this teeming is about, we will magnify it another two hundred and
fifty times and we will see something similar to what is shown in Fig. 1-1. This
is a picture of water magnified a billion times, but idealized in several ways.

In the first place, the particles are drawn in a simple manner with sharp edges,
which is inaccurate. Secondly, for simplicity, they are sketched almost schematically
in a two-dimensional arrangement, but of course they are moving around in
three dimensions. Notice that there are two kinds of "blobs" or circles to represent
the atoms of oxygen (black) and hydrogen (white), and that each oxygen has two
hydrogens tied to it. (Each little group of an oxygen with its two hydrogens is
called a molecule.) The picture is idealized further in that the real particles in
nature are continually jiggling and bouncing, turning and twisting around one
another. You will have to imagine this as a dynamic rather than a static picture.
Another thing that cannot be illustrated in a drawing is the fact that the particles
are " stuck together " — that they attract each other, this one pulled by that one,
etc. The whole group is " glued together," so to speak. On the other hand, the
particles do not squeeze through each other. If you try to squeeze two of them too
close together, they repel.
The atoms are 1 or 2 X 10~8 cm in radius. Now 10~8 cm is called an
angstrom (just as another name), so we say they are 1 or 2 angstroms (A) in radius.
Another way to remember their size is this: if an apple is magnified to the size
of the earth, then the atoms in the apple are approximately the size of the original
apple.

Now imagine this great drop of water with all of these jiggling particles stuck
together and tagging along with each other. The water keeps its volume; it does
not fall apart, because of the attraction of the molecules for each other. If the
drop is on a slope, where it can move from one place to another, the water will
flow, but it does not just disappear — things do not just fly apart—because of
the molecular attraction. Now the jiggling motion is what we represent as heat:
when we increase the temperature, we increase the motion. If we heat the water,
the jiggling increases and the volume between the atoms increases, and if the
heating continues there comes a time when the pull between the molecules is not
enough to hold them together and they do fly apart and become separated from
one another. Of course, this is how we manufacture steam out of water — by
increasing the temperature; the particles fly apart because of the increased motion.
In Fig. 1-2 we have a picture of steam. This picture of steam fails in one
respect: at ordinary atmospheric pressure there might be only a few molecules in
a whole room, and there certainly would not be as many as three in this figure.
Most squares this size would contain none — but we accidentally have two and a
half or three in the picture (just so it would not be completely blank). Now in
the case of steam we see the characteristic molecules more clearly than in the case
of water. For simplicity, the molecules are drawn so that there is a 120° angle
between them. In actual fact the angle is 105°3', and the distance between the
center of a hydrogen and the center of the oxygen is 0.957 A, so we know this
molecule very well.

Let us see what some of the properties of steam vapor or any other gas are.
The molecules, being separated from one another, will bounce against the walls.
Imagine a room with a number of tennis balls (a hundred or so) bouncing around
in perpetual motion. When they bombard the wall, this pushes the wall away.
(Of course we would have to push the wall back.) This means that the gas exerts
a jittery force which our coarse senses (not being ourselves magnified a billion
times) feels only as an average push. In order to confine a gas we must apply a
pressure. Figure 1-3 shows a standard vessel for holding gases (used in all
textbooks), a cylinder with a piston in it. Now, it makes no difference what the
shapes of water molecules are, so for simplicity we shall draw them as tennis
balls or little dots. These things are in perpetual motion in all directions. So many
of them are hitting the top piston all the time that to keep it from being patiently
knocked out of the tank by this continuous banging, we shall have to hold the
piston down by a certain force, which we call the pressure (really, the pressure
times the area is the force). Clearly, the force is proportional to the area, for if
we increase the area but keep the number of molecules per cubic centimeter the
same, we increase the number of collisions with the piston in the same proportion
as the area was increased.

Now let us put twice as many molecules in this tank, so as to double the density,
and let them have the same speed, i.e., the same temperature. Then, to a
close approximation, the number of collisions will be doubled, and since each will
be just as "energetic" as before, the pressure is proportional to the density. If we
consider the true nature of the forces between the atoms, we would expect a slight
decrease in pressure because of the attraction between the atoms, and a slight
increase because of the finite volume they occupy. Nevertheless, to an excellent
approximation, if the density is low enough that there are not many atoms, the
pressure is proportional to the density.
We can also see something else: If we increase the temperature without
changing the density of the gas, i.e., if we increase the speed of the atoms, what
is going to happen to the pressure? Well, the atoms hit harder because they are
moving faster, and in addition they hit more often, so the pressure increases.
You see how simple the ideas of atomic theory are.

We can also see something else: If we increase the temperature without
changing the density of the gas, i.e., if we increase the speed of the atoms, what
is going to happen to the pressure? Well, the atoms hit harder because they are
moving faster, and in addition they hit more often, so the pressure increases.
You see how simple the ideas of atomic theory are.
Let us consider another situation. Suppose that the piston moves inward,
so that the atoms are slowly compressed into a smaller space. What happens when
an atom hits the moving piston? Evidently it picks up speed from the collision.
You can try it by bouncing a ping-pong ball from a forward-moving paddle, for
example, and you will find that it comes off with more speed than that with which
it struck. (Special example: if an atom happens to be standing still and the piston
hits it, it will certainly move.) So the atoms are "hotter" when they come away
from the piston than they were before they struck it. Therefore all the atoms which
are in the vessel will have picked up speed. This means that when we compress
a gas slowly, the temperature of the gas increases. So, under slow compression,
a gas will increase in temperature, and under slow expansion it will decrease in
temperature.

We now return to our drop of water and look in another direction. Suppose
that we decrease the temperature of our drop of water. Suppose that the jiggling
of the molecules of the atoms in the water is steadily decreasing. We know that
there are forces of attraction between the atoms, so that after a while they will
not be able to jiggle so well. What will happen at very low temperatures is indicated
in Fig. 14: the molecules lock into a new pattern which is ice. This
particular schematic diagram of ice is wrong because it is in two dimensions, but
it is right qualitatively. The interesting point is that the material has a definite
place for every atom, and you can easily appreciate that if somehow or other we
were to hold all the atoms at one end of the drop in a certain arrangement, each
atom in a certain place, then because of the structure of interconnections, which is
rigid, the other end miles away (at our magnified scale) will have a definite location.
So if we hold a needle of ice at one end, the other end resists our pushing it aside,
unlike the case of water, in which the structure is broken down because of the
increased jiggling so that the atoms all move around in different ways. The difference between solids and liquids is, then, that in a solid the atoms are arranged in
some kind of an array, called a crystalline array, and they do not have a random
position at long distances; the position of the atoms on one side of the crystal
is determined by that of other atoms millions of atoms away on the other side of
the crystal. Figure 14 is an invented arrangement for ice, and although it contains
many of the correct features of ice, it is not the true arrangement. One of the
correct features is that there is a part of the symmetry that is hexagonal. You can
see that if we turn the picture around an axis by 120°, the picture returns to itself.
So there is a symmetry in the ice which accounts for the six-sided appearance of
snowflakes. Another thing we can see from Fig. 14 is why ice shrinks when it
melts. The particular crystal pattern of ice shown here has many "holes" in it,
as does the true ice structure. When the organization breaks down, these holes
can be occupied by molecules. Most simple substances, with the exception of
water and type metal, expand upon melting, because the atoms are closely packed
in the solid crystal and upon melting need more room to jiggle around, but an
open structure collapses, as in the case of water.

Now although ice has a "rigid" crystalline form, its temperature can change
— ice has heat. If we wish, we can change the amount of heat. What is the heat in

the case of ice? The atoms are not standing still. They are jiggling and vibrating.
So even though there is a definite order to the crystal — a definite structure — all
of the atoms are vibrating "in place." As we increase the temperature, they vibrate
with greater and greater amplitude, until they shake themselves out of place.
We call this melting. As we decrease the temperature, the vibration decreases
and decreases until, at absolute zero, there is a minimum amount of vibration
that the atoms can have, but not zero. This minimum amount of motion that atoms
can have is not enough to melt a substance, with one exception: helium. Helium
merely decreases the atomic motions as much as it can, but even at absolute zero
there is still enough motion to keep it from freezing. Helium, even at absolute
zero, does not freeze, unless the pressure is made so great as to make the atoms
squash together. If we increase the pressure, we can make it solidify.

1-3 Atomic processes
So much for the description of solids, liquids, and gases from the atomic
point of view. However, the atomic hypothesis also describes processes, and so we
shall now look at a number of processes from an atomic standpoint. The first
process that we shall look at is associated with the surface of the water. What
happens at the surface of the water? We shall now make the picture more complicated
— and more realistic—by imagining that the surface is in air. Figure 1-5
shows the surface of water in air. We see the water molecules as before, forming
a body of liquid water, but now we also see the surface of the water. Above the
surface we find a number of things: First of all there are water molecules, as in steam.
This is water vapor, which is always found above liquid water. (There is an
equilibrium between the steam vapor and the water which will be described later.)
In addition we find some other molecules—here two oxygen atoms stuck together
by themselves, forming an oxygen molecule, there two nitrogen atoms also stuck
together to make a nitrogen molecule. Air consists almost entirely of nitrogen,
oxygen, some water vapor, and lesser amounts of carbon dioxide, argon, and
other things. So above the water surface is the air, a gas, containing some water
vapor. Now what is happening in this picture? The molecules in the water are
always jiggling around. From time to time, one on the surface happens to be hit
a little harder than usual, and gets knocked away. It is hard to see that happening
in the picture because it is a still picture. But we can imagine that one molecule
near the surface has just been hit and is flying out, or perhaps another one has
been hit and is flying out. Thus, molecule by molecule, the water disappears —
it evaporates. But if we close the vessel above, after a while we shall find a large
number of molecules of water amongst the air molecules. From time to time, one
of these vapor molecules comes flying down to the water and gets stuck again.
So we see that what looks like a dead, uninteresting thing — a glass of water with
a cover, that has been sitting there for perhaps twenty years—really contains a
dynamic and interesting phenomenon which is going on all the time. To our eyes,
our crude eyes, nothing is changing, but if we could see it a billion times magnified,
we would see that from its own point of view it is always changing: molecules
are leaving the surface, molecules are coming back.

Why do we see no change? Because just as many molecules are leaving as
are coming back! In the long run "nothing happens." If we then take the top of
the vessel off and blow the moist air away, replacing it with dry air, then the
number of molecules leaving is just the same as it was before, because this depends
on the jiggling of the water, but the number coming back is greatly reduced because
there are so many fewer water molecules above the water. Therefore there
are more going out than coming in, and the water evaporates. Hence, if you wish
to evaporate water turn on the fan!
Here is something else: Which molecules leave? When a molecule leaves it
is due to an accidental, extra accumulation of a little bit more than ordinary
energy, which it needs if it is to break away from the attractions of its neighbors.
Therefore, since those that leave have more energy than the average, the ones that
are left have less average motion than they had before. So the liquid gradually

cools if it evaporates. Of course, when a molecule of vapor comes from the air to
the water below there is a sudden great attraction as the molecule approaches
the surface. This speeds up the incoming molecule and results in generation of
heat. So when they leave they take away heat; when they come back they generate
heat. Of course when there is no net evaporation the result is nothing—the water
is not changing temperature. If we blow on the water so as to maintain a continuous
preponderance in the number evaporating, then the water is cooled. Hence,
blow on soup to cool it!
Of course you should realize that the processes just described are more complicated
than we have indicated. Not only does the water go into the air, but also,
from time to time, one of the oxygen or nitrogen molecules will come in and "get
lost" in the mass of water molecules, and work its way into the water. Thus the
air dissolves in the water; oxygen and nitrogen molecules will work their way into
the water and the water will contain air. If we suddenly take the air away from the
vessel, then the air molecules will leave more rapidly than they come in, and in
doing so will make bubbles. This is very bad for divers, as you may know.

Now we go on to another process. In Fig. 1-6 we see, from an atomic point
of view, a solid dissolving in water. If we put a crystal of salt in the water, what
will happen? Salt is a solid, a crystal, an organized arrangement of "salt atoms."
Figure 1-7 is an illustration of the three-dimensional structure of common salt,
sodium chloride. Strictly speaking, the crystal is not made of atoms, but of what
we call ions. An ion is an atom which either has a few extra electrons or has lost
a few electrons. In a salt crystal we find chlorine ions (chlorine atoms with an
extra electron) and sodium ions (sodium atoms with one electron missing). The
ions all stick together by electrical attraction in the solid salt, but when we put
them in the water we find, because of the attractions of the negative oxygen and
positive hydrogen for the ions, that some of the ions jiggle loose. In Fig. 1-6
we see a chlorine ion getting loose, and other atoms floating in the water in the form
of ions. This picture was made with some care. Notice, for example, that the
hydrogen ends of the water molecules are more likely to be near the chlorine ion,
while near the sodium ion we are more likely to find the oxygen end, because the
sodium is positive and the oxygen end of the water is negative, and they attract
electrically. Can we tell from this picture whether the salt is dissolving in water or
crystallizing out of water? Of course we cannot tell, because while some of the
atoms are leaving the crystal other atoms are rejoining it. The process is a dynamic
one, just as in the case of evaporation, and it depends on whether there is more or
less salt in the water than the amount needed for equilibrium. By equilibrium we
mean that situation in which the rate at which atoms are leaving just matches the
rate at which they are coming back. If there is almost no salt in the water, more
atoms leave than return, and the salt dissolves. If, on the other hand, there are
too many "salt atoms," more return than leave, and the salt is crystallizing.
In passing, we mention that the concept of a molecule of a substance is only
approximate and exists only for a certain class of substances. It is clear in the
case of water that the three atoms are actually stuck together. It is not so clear
in the case of sodium chloride in the solid. There is just an arrangement of sodium
and chlorine ions in a cubic pattern. There is no natural way to group them as
"molecules of salt."

Returning to our discussion of solution and precipitation, if we increase the
temperature of the salt solution, then the rate at which atoms are taken away is
increased, and so is the rate at which atoms are brought back. It turns out to be
very difficult, in general, to predict which way it is going to go, whether more or
less of the solid will dissolve. Most substances dissolve more, but some substances
dissolve less, as the temperature increases.

14 Chemical reactions
In all of the processes which have been described so far, the atoms and the
ions have not changed partners, but of course there are circumstances in which
the atoms do change combinations, forming new molecules. This is illustrated in

Fig. 1-8. A process in which the rearrangement of the atomic partners occurs is
what we call a chemical reaction. The other processes so far described are called
physical processes, but there is no sharp distinction between the two. (Nature
does not care what we call it, she just keeps on doing it.) This figure is supposed
to represent carbon burning in oxygen. In the case of oxygen, two oxygen atoms
stick together very strongly. (Why do not three or evenfour stick together? That
is one of the very peculiar characteristics of such atomic processes. Atoms are
very special: they like certain particular partners, certain particular directions, and
so on. It is the job of physics to analyze why each one wants what it wants. At
any rate, two oxygen atoms form, saturated and happy, a molecule.)
The carbon atoms are supposed to be in a solid crystal (which could be graphite
or diamond*). Now, for example, one of the oxygen molecules can come over to
the carbon, and each atom can pick up a carbon atom and go flying off in a new
combination—"carbon-oxygen"—which is a molecule of the gas called carbon
monoxide. It is given the chemical name CO. It is very simple: the letters "CO"
are practically a picture of that molecule. But carbon attracts oxygen much more
than oxygen attracts oxygen or carbon attracts carbon. Therefore in this process
the oxygen may arrive with only a little energy, but the oxygen and carbon will
snap together with a tremendous vengeance and commotion, and everything near
them will pick up the energy. A large amount of motion energy, kinetic energy,
is thus generated. This of course is burning; we are getting heat from the combination
of oxygen and carbon. The heat is ordinarily in the form of the molecular
motion of the hot gas, but in certain circumstances it can be so enormous that it
generates light. That is how one gets flames.

In addition, the carbon monoxide is not quite satisfied. It is possible for it
to attach another oxygen, so that we might have a much more complicated reaction
in which the oxygen is combining with the carbon, while at the same time there
happens to be a collision with a carbon monoxide molecule. One oxygen atom
could attach itself to the CO and ultimately form a molecule, composed of one
carbon and two oxygens, which is designated CO2 and called carbon dioxide.
If we burn the carbon with very little oxygen in a very rapid reaction (for example,
in an automobile engine, where the explosion is so fast that there is not time for
it to make carbon dioxide) a considerable amount of carbon monoxide is formed.
In many such rearrangements, a very large amount of energy is released, forming
explosions, flames, etc., depending on the reactions. Chemists have studied these
arrangements of the atoms, and found that every substance is some type of arrangement
of atoms.
To illustrate this idea, let us consider another example. If we go into a field
of small violets, we know what "that smell" is. It is some kind of molecule, or
arrangement of atoms, that has worked its way into our noses. First of all, how
did it work its way in? That is rather easy. If the smell is some kind of molecule
in the air, jiggling around and being knocked every which way, it might have
accidentally worked its way into the nose. Certainly it has no particular desire to
get into our nose. It is merely one helpless part of a jostling crowd of molecules,
and in its aimless wanderings this particular chunk of matter happens to find
itself in the nose.

Now chemists can take special molecules like the odor of violets, and analyze
them and tell us the exact arrangement of the atoms in space. We know that the
carbon dioxide molecule is straight and symmetrical: O — C — O. (That can be determined
easily, too, by physical methods.) However, even for the vastly more complicated
arrangements of atoms that there are in chemistry, one can, by a long,
remarkable process of detective work, find the arrangements of the atoms. Figure
1-9 is a picture of the air in the neighborhood of a violet; again we find nitrogen
and oxygen in the air, and water vapor. (Why is there water vapor? Because the
violet is wet. All plants transpire.) However, we also see a "monster" composed
of carbon atoms, hydrogen atoms, and oxygen atoms, which have picked a certain
particular pattern in which to be arranged. It is a much more complicated arrangement

 * One can burn a diamond in air.


ment than that of carbon dioxide; in fact, it is an enormously complicated arrangement.
Unfortunately, we cannot picture all that is really known about it chemically,
because the precise arrangement of all the atoms is actually known in three
dimensions, while our picture is in only two dimensions. The six carbons which
form a ring do not form a flat ring, but a kind of "puckered" ring. All of the
angles and distances are known. So a chemical formula is merely a picture of such
a molecule. When the chemist writes such a thing on the blackboard, he is trying
to "draw," roughly speaking, in two dimensions. For example, we see a "ring"
of six carbons, and a "chain" of carbons hanging on the end, with an oxygen
second from the end, three hydrogens tied to that carbon, two carbons and three
hydrogens sticking up here, etc.
How does the chemist find what the arrangement is? He mixes bottles full
of stuff together, and if it turns red, it tells him that it consists of one hydrogen and
two carbons tied on here; if it turns blue, on the other hand, that is not the way
it is at all. This is one of the most fantastic pieces of detective work that has ever
been done—organic chemistry. To discover the arrangement of the atoms in these
enormously complicated arrays the chemist looks at what happens when he mixes
two different substances together. The physicist could never quite believe that the
chemist knew what he was talking about when he described the arrangement of

the atoms. For about twenty years it has been possible, in some cases, to look at
such molecules (not quite as complicated as this one, but some which contain
parts of it) by a physical method, and it has been possible to locate every atom,
not by looking at colors, but by measuring where they are. And lo and behold!,
the chemists are almost always correct.

It turns out, in fact, that in the odor of violets there are three slightly different
molecules, which differ only in the arrangement of the hydrogen atoms.

One problem of chemistry is to name a substance, so that we will know what
Find a name for this shape! Not only must the name tell the shape, but it
must also tell that here is an oxygen atom, there a hydrogen—exactly what and
where each atom is. So we can appreciate that the chemical names must be complex
in order to be complete. You see that the name of this thing in the more complete
form that will tell you the structure of it is 4-B, 2, 3, 6 tetramethyl -5-
cyclohexanyl)-3-buten-2-one, and that tells you that this is the arrangement. We
can appreciate the difficulties that the chemists have, and also appreciate the reason
for such long names. It is not that they wish to be obscure, but they have an
extremely difficult problem in trying to describe the molecules in words!

How do we know that there are atoms? By one of the tricks mentioned earlier:
we make the hypothesis that there are atoms, and one after the other results come
out the way we predict, as they ought to if things are made of atoms. There is
also somewhat more direct evidence, a good example of which is the following:
The atoms are so small that you cannot see them with a light microscope—in
fact, not even with an electron microscope. (With a light microscope you can only
see things which are much bigger.) Now if the atoms are always in motion, say in
water, and we put a big ball of something in the water, a ball much bigger than the
atoms, the ball will jiggle around—much as in a push ball game, where a great
big ball is pushed around by a lot of people. The people are pushing in various
directions, and the ball moves around the field in an irregular fashion. So, in the
same way, the "large ball" will move because of the inequalities of the collisions
on one side to the other, from one moment to the next. Therefore, if we look at
very tiny particles (colloids) in water through an excellent microscope, we see
a perpetual jiggling of the particles, which is the result of the bombardment of the
atoms. This is called the Brownian motion.
We can see further evidence for atoms in the structure of crystals. In many
cases the structures deduced by x-ray analysis agree in their spatial "shapes" with
the forms actually exhibited by crystals as they occur in nature. The angles between
the various "faces" of a crystal agree, within seconds of arc, with angles
deduced on the assumption that a crystal is made of many "layers" of atoms.
Everything is made of atoms. That is the key hypothesis. The most important
hypothesis in all of biology, for example, is that everything that animals do, atoms

do. In other words, there is nothing that living things do that cannot be understood
from the point of view that they are made of atoms acting according to the laws
of physics. This was not known from the beginning: it took some experimenting
and theorizing to suggest this hypothesis, but now it is accepted, and it is the most
useful theory for producing new ideas in the field of biology.
If a piece of steel or a piece of salt, consisting of atoms one next to the other,
can have such interesting properties; if water—which is nothing but these little
blobs, mile upon mile of the same thing over the earth—can form waves and foam,
and make rushing noises and strange patterns as it runs over cement; if all of
this, all the life of a stream of water, can be nothing but a pile of atoms, how much
more is possible? If instead of arranging the atoms in some definite pattern,
again and again repeated, on and on, or even forming little lumps of complexity
like the odor of violets, we make an arrangement which is always different from
place to place, with different kinds of atoms arranged in many ways, continually
changing, not repeating, how much more marvelously is it possible that this thing
might behave? Is it possible that that "thing" walking back and forth in front of
you, talking to you, is a great glob of these atoms in a very complex arrangement,
such that the sheer complexity of it staggers the imagination as to what it can do?
When we say we are a pile of atoms, we do not mean we are merely a pile of atoms,
because a pile of atoms which is not repeated from one to the other might well
have the possibilities which you see before you in the mirror.

2-1 Introduction
In this chapter, we shall examine the most fundamental ideas that we have
about physics—the nature of things as we see them at the present time. We shall
not discuss the history of how we know that all these ideas are true; you will
learn these details in due time.
The things with which we concern ourselves in science appear in myriad forms,
and with a multitude of attributes. For example, if we stand on the shore and look
at the sea, we see the water, the waves breaking, the foam, the sloshing motion
of the water, the sound, the air, the winds and the clouds, the sun and the blue
sky, and light; there is sand and there are rocks of various hardness and permanence,
color and texture. There are animals and seaweed, hunger and disease, and
the observer on the beach; there may be even happiness and thought. Any other
spot in nature has a similar variety of things and influences. It is always as complicated
as that, no matter where it is. Curiosity demands that we ask questions,
that we try to put things together and try to understand this multitude of aspects
as perhaps resulting from the action of a relatively small number of elemental
things and forces acting in an infinite variety of combinations.

For example: Is the sand other than the rocks? That is, is the sand perhaps
nothing but a great number of very tiny stones? Is the moon a great rock? If we
understood rocks, would we also understand the sand and the moon? Is the wind
a sloshing of the air analogous to the sloshing motion of the water in the sea?
What common features do different movements have? What is common to different kinds of sound? How many different colors are there? And so on. In this
way we try gradually to analyze all things, to put together things which at first
sight look different, with the hope that we may be able to reduce the number of
different things and thereby understand them better.
A few hundred years ago, a method was devised to find partial answers to
such questions. Observation, reason, and experiment make up what we call the
scientific method. We shall have to limit ourselves to a bare description of our
basic view of what is sometimes called fundamental physics, or fundamental ideas
which have arisen from the application of the scientific method.
What do we mean by "understanding" something? We can imagine that this
complicated array of moving things which constitutes "the world" is something
like a great chess game being played by the gods, and we are observers of the game.
We do not know what the rules of the game are; all we are allowed to do is to
watch the playing. Of course, if we watch long enough, we may eventually catch
on to a few of the rules. The rules of the game are what we mean by fundamental
physics. Even if we knew every rule, however, we might not be able to understand
why a particular move is made in the game, merely because it is too complicated
and our minds are limited. If you play chess you must know that it is
easy to learn all the rules, and yet it is often very hard to select the best move or
to understand why a player moves as he does. So it is in nature, only much more
so; but we may be able at least to find all the rules. Actually, we do not have all
the rules now. (Every once in a while something like castling is going on that we
still do not understand.) Aside from not knowing all of the rules, what we really
can explain in terms of those rules is very limited, because almost all situations are
so enormously complicated that we cannot follow the plays of the game using the
rules, much less tell what is going to happen next. We must, therefore, limit ourselves
to the more basic question of the rules of the game. If we know the rules,
we consider that we "understand" the world.


How can we tell whether the rules which we "guess" at are really right if we
cannot analyze the game very well? There are, roughly speaking, three ways. First,
there may be situations where nature has arranged, or we arrange nature, to be
simple and to have so few parts that we can predict exactly what will happen,
and thus we can check how our rules work. (In one corner of the board there may
be only a few chess pieces at work, and that we can figure out exactly.)
A second good way to check rules is in terms of less specific rules derived
from them. For example, the rule on the move of a bishop on a chessboard is
that it moves only on the diagonal. One can deduce, no matter how many moves
may be made, that a certain bishop will always be on a red square. So, without
being able to follow the details, we can always check our idea about the bishop's
motion by finding out whether it is always on a red square. Of course it will be,
for a long time, until all of a sudden we find that it is on a black square (what
happened of course, is that in the meantime it was captured, another pawn crossed
for queening, and it turned into a bishop on a black square). That is the way it is
in physics. For a long time we will have a rule that works excellently in an over-all
way, even when we cannot follow the details, and then some time we may discover
a new rule. From the point of view of basic physics, the most interesting phenomena
are of course in the new places, the places where the rules do not work—not the
places where they do work! That is the way in which we discover new rules.
The third way to tell whether our ideas are right is relatively crude but probably
the most powerful of them all. That is, by rough approximation. While we
may not be able to tell why Alekhine moves this particular piece, perhaps we can
roughly understand that he is gathering his pieces around the king to protect it,
more or less, since that is the sensible thing to do in the circumstances. In the
same way, we can often understand nature, more or less, without being able to see
what every little piece is doing, in terms of our understanding of the game.

The third way to tell whether our ideas are right is relatively crude but probably
the most powerful of them all. That is, by rough approximation. While we
may not be able to tell why Alekhine moves this particular piece, perhaps we can
roughly understand that he is gathering his pieces around the king to protect it,
more or less, since that is the sensible thing to do in the circumstances. In the
same way, we can often understand nature, more or less, without being able to see
what every little piece is doing, in terms of our understanding of the game.
At first the phenomena of nature were roughly divided into classes, like heat,
electricity, mechanics, magnetism, properties of substances, chemical phenomena,
light or optics, x-rays, nuclear physics, gravitation, meson phenomena, etc. However,
the aim is to see complete nature as different aspects of one set of phenomena.
That is the problem in basic theoretical physics, today—to find the laws behind
experiment; to amalgamate these classes. Historically, we have always been able
to amalgamate them, but as time goes on new things are found. We were amalgamating
very well, when all of a sudden x-rays were found. Then we amalgamated
some more, and mesons were found. Therefore, at any stage of the game, it always
looks rather messy. A great deal is amalgamated, but there are always many wires
or threads hanging out in all directions. That is the situation today, which we shall
try to describe.
Some historic examples of amalgamation are the following. First, take heat
and mechanics. When atoms are in motion, the more motion, the more heat the
system contains, and so heat and all temperature effects can be represented by the
laws of mechanics. Another tremendous amalgamation was the discovery of the
relation between electricity, magnetism, and light, which were found to be different
aspects of the same thing, which we call today the electromagnetic field.
Another amalgamation is the unification of chemical phenomena, the various
properties of various substances, and the behavior of atomic particles, which is in
the quantum mechanics of chemistry.

The question is, of course, is it going to be possible to amalgamate everything,
and merely discover that this world represents different aspects of one thing?
Nobody knows. All we know is that as we go along, we find that we can amalgamate
pieces, and then we find some pieces that do not fit, and we keep trying to
put the jigsaw puzzle together. Whether there are a finite number of pieces, and
whether there is even a border to the puzzle, is of course unknown. It will never
be known until we finish the picture, if ever. What we wish to do here is to see to
what extent this amalgamation process has gone on, and what the situation is at
present, in understanding basic phenomena in terms of the smallest set of principles.
To express it in a simple manner, what are things made of and how few elements
are there?

2-2 Physics before 1920
It is a little difficult to begin at once with the present view, so we shall first
see how things looked in about 1920 and then take a few things out of that picture.
Before 1920, our world picture was something like this: The "stage" on which
the universe goes is the three-dimensional space of geometry, as described by
Euclid, and things change in a medium called time. The elements on the stage are
particles, for example the atoms, which have some properties. First, the property
of inertia: if a particle is moving it keeps on going in the same direction unless
forces act upon it. The second element, then, is forces, which were then thought
to be of two varieties: First, an enormously complicated, detailed kind of interaction
force which held the various atoms in different combinations in a complicated
way, which determined whether salt would dissolve faster or slower when
we raise the temperature. The other force that was known was a long-range
interaction—a smooth and quiet attraction—which varied inversely as the square
of the distance, and was called gravitation. This law was known and was very
simple. Why things remain in motion when they are moving, or why there is a
law of gravitation was, of course, not known.
A description of nature is what we are concerned with here. From this point
of view, then, a gas, and indeed all matter, is a myriad of moving particles. Thus
many of the things we saw while standing at the seashore can immediately be
connected. First the pressure: this comes from the collisions of the atoms with
the walls or whatever; the drift of the atoms, if they are all moving in one directionon the average, is wind; the random internal motions are the heat. There are
waves of excess density, where too many particles have collected, and so as they
rush off they push up piles of particles farther out, and so on. This wave of excess
density is sound. It is a tremendous achievement to be able to understand so much.
Some of these things were described in the previous chapter.

What kinds of particles are there? There were considered to be 92 at that time:
92 different kinds of atoms were ultimately discovered. They had different names
associated with their chemical properties.
The next part of the problem was, what are the short-range forces ? Why
does carbon attract one oxygen or perhaps two oxygens, but not three oxygens?
What is the machinery of interaction between atoms? Is it gravitation? The answer
is no. Gravity is entirely too weak. But imagine a force analogous to gravity,
varying inversely with the square of the distance, but enormously more powerful
and having one difference. In gravity everything attracts everything else, but now
imagine that there are two kinds of "things," and that this new force (which is
the electrical force, of course) has the property that likes repel but unlikes attract.
The "thing" that carries this strong interaction is called charge.
Then what do we have? Suppose that we have two unlikes that attract each
other, a plus and a minus, and that they stick very close together. Suppose we
have another charge some distance away. Would it feel any attraction? It would
feel practically none, because if the first two are equal in size, the attraction for
the one and the repulsion for the other balance out. Therefore there is very little
force at any appreciable distance. On the other hand, if we get very close with the
extra charge, attraction arises, because the repulsion of likes and attraction of
unlikes will tend to bring unlikes closer together and push likes farther apart.
Then the repulsion will be less than the attraction. This is the reason why the atoms,
which are constituted out of plus and minus electric charges, feel very little force
when they are separated by appreciable distance (aside from gravity). When they
come close together, they can "see inside" each other and rearrange their charges,
with the result that they have a very strong interaction. The ultimate basis of
an interaction between the atoms is electrical. Since this force is so enormous, all
the plusses and all minuses will normally come together in as intimate a combination
as they can. All things, even ourselves, are made of fine-grained, enormously
strongly interacting plus and minus parts, all neatly balanced out. Once in a while,
by accident, we may rub off a few minuses or a few plusses (usually it is easier
to rub off minuses), and in those circumstances we find the force of electricity
unbalanced, and we can then see the effects of these electrical attractions.

To give an idea of how much stronger electricity is than gravitation, consider
two grains of sand, a millimeter across, thirty meters apart. If the force between
them were not balanced, if everything attracted everything else instead of likes
repelling, so that there were no cancellation, how much force would there be?
There Would be a force of three million tons between the two! You see, there is
very, very little excess or deficit of the number of negative or positive charges
necessary to produce appreciable electrical effects. This is, of course, the reason
why you cannot see the difference between an electrically charged or uncharged
thing—so few particles are involved that they hardly make a difference in the weight
or size of an object.
With this picture the atoms were easier to understand. They were thought to
have a "nucleus" at the center, which is positively electrically charged and very
massive, and the nucleus is surrounded by a certain number of "electrons" which
are very light and negatively charged. Now we go a little ahead in our story to
remark that in the nucleus itself there were found two kinds of particles, protons
and neutrons, almost of the same weight and very heavy. The protons are electrically
charged and the neutrons are neutral. If we have an atom with six protons
inside its nucleus, and this is surrounded by six electrons (the negative particles in
the ordinary world of matter are all electrons, and these are very light compared
with the protons and neutrons which make nuclei), this would be atom number
six in the chemical table, and it is called carbon. Atom number eight is called
oxygen, etc., because the chemical properties depend upon the electrons on the
outside, and in fact only upon how many electrons there are. So the chemical
properties of a substance depend only on a number, the number of electrons. (The
whole list of elements of the chemists really could have been called 1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
etc. Instead of saying "carbon," we could say "element six," meaning six electrons,
but of course, when the elements were first discovered, it was not known that they
could be numbered that way, and secondly, it would make everything look rather
complicated. It is better to have names and symbols for these things, rather than
to call everything by number.)

More was discovered about the electrical force. The natural interpretation
of electrical interaction is that two objects simply attract each other: plus against
minus. However, this was discovered to be an inadequate idea to represent it.
A more adequate representation of the situation is to say that the existence of the
positive charge, in some sense, distorts, or creates a "condition" in space, so that
when we put the negative charge in, it feels a force. This potentiality for producing
a force is called an electric field. When we put an electron in an electric field,
we say it is "pulled." We then have two rules: (a) charges make a field, and
(b) charges in fields have forces on them and move. The reason for this will become
clear when we discuss the following phenomena: If we were to charge a body,
say a comb, electrically, and then place a charged piece of paper at a distance and
move the comb back and forth, the paper will respond by always pointing to the
comb. If we shake it faster, it will be discovered that the paper is a little behind,
there is a delay in the action. (At the first stage, when we move the comb rather
slowly, we find a complication which is magnetism. Magnetic influences have to
do with charges in relative motion, so magnetic forces and electric forces can really
be attributed to one field, as two different aspects of exactly the same thing. A
changing electric field cannot exist without magnetism.) If we move the charged
paper farther out, the delay is greater. Then an interesting thing is observed.
Although the forces between two charged objects should go inversely as the
square of the distance, it is found, when we shake a charge, that the influence
extends very much farther out than we would guess at first sight. That is, the effect
falls off more slowly than the inverse square.
Here is an analogy: If we are in a pool of water and there is a floating cork
very close by, we can move it "directly" by pushing the water with another cork.
If you looked only at the two corks, all you would see would be that one moved
immediately in response to the motion of the other—there is some kind of " interaction "
between them. Of course, what we really do is to disturb the water; the
water then disturbs the other cork. We could make up a "law" that if you pushed

the water a little bit, an object close by in the water would move. If it were farther
away, of course, the second cork would scarcely move, for we move the water
locally. On the other hand, if we jiggle the cork a new phenomenon is involved,
in which the motion of the water moves the water there, etc., and waves travel
away, so that by jiggling, there is an influence very much farther out, an oscillatory
influence, that cannot be understood from the direct interaction. Therefore the
idea of direct interaction must be replaced with the existence of the water, or in
the electrical case, with what we call the electromagnetic field.
The electromagnetic field can carry waves; some of these waves are light,
others are used in radio broadcasts, but the general name is electromagnetic waves.
These oscillatory waves can have various frequencies. The only thing that is really
different from one wave to another is the frequency of oscillation. If we shake a
charge back and forth more and more rapidly, and look at the effects, we get a
whole series of different kinds of effects, which are all unified by specifying but
one number, the number of oscillations per second. The usual "pickup" that we
get from electric currents in the circuits in the walls of a building have a frequency
of about one hundred cycles per second. If we increase the frequency to 500 or
1000 kilocycles A kilocycle = 1000 cycles) per second, we are "on the air," for
this is the frequency range which is used for radio broadcasts. (Of course it has
nothing to do with the air! We can have radio broadcasts without any air.) If
we again increase the frequency, we come into the range that is used for FM and
TV. Going still further, we use certain short waves, for example for radar. Still
higher, and we do not need an instrument to "see" the stuff, we can see it with the
human eye. In the range of frequency from 5 X 10H to 5 X 1016 cycles per
second our eyes would see the oscillation of the charged comb, if we could shake it
that fast, as red, blue, or violet light, depending on the frequency. Frequencies
below this range are called infrared, and above it, ultraviolet. The fact that we
can see in a particular frequency range makes that part of the electromagnetic
spectrum no more impressive than the other parts from a physicist's standpoint,
but from a human standpoint, of course, it is more interesting. If we go up even
higher in frequency, we get x-rays. X-rays are nothing but very high-frequency
light. If we go still higher, we get gamma rays. These two terms, x-rays and gamma
rays, are used almost synonymously. Usually electromagnetic rays coming from
nuclei are called gamma rays, while those of high energy from atoms are called
x-rays, but at the same frequency they are indistinguishable physically, no matter
what their source. If we go to still higher frequencies, say to 1024 cycles per
second, we find that we can make those waves artificially, for example with the
synchrotron here at Caltech. We can find electromagnetic waves with stupendously
high frequencies—with even a thousand times more rapid oscillation — in the waves
found in cosmic rays. These waves cannot be controlled by us.

Table 2-1
The Electromagnetic Spectrum
Frequency in Rough
oscillations / sec Name behavior
 Electrical disturbance Field
Waves
Particle
Radio broadcast
FM — TV
Radar
Light
X-rays
T-rays, nuclear
T-rays, " artificial "
T-rays, in cosmic rays

2-3 Quantum physics
Having described the idea of the electromagnetic field, and that this field
can carry waves, we soon learn that these waves actually behave in a strange way
which seems very unwavelike. At higher frequencies they behave much more like
particles! It is quantum mechanics, discovered just after 1920, which explains this
strange behavior. In the years before 1920, the picture of space as a three - dimensional
space, and of time as a separate thing, was changed by Einstein, first into
a combination which we call space-time, and then still further into a curved
space-time to represent gravitation. So the "stage" is changed into space-time,
and gravitation is presumably a modification of space-time. Then it was also found
that the rules for the motions of particles were incorrect. The mechanical rules of
"inertia" and "forces" are wrong—Newton's laws are wrong—in the world of atoms.
Instead, it was discovered that things on a small scale behave nothing like things on
a large scale. That is what makes physics difficult—and very interesting. It is hard
because the way things behave on a small scale is so " unnatural "; we have no
direct experience with it. Here things behave like nothing we know of, so that it is
impossible to describe this behavior in any other than analytic ways. It is difficult,
and takes a lot of imagination.

Quantum mechanics has many aspects. In the first place, the idea that a
particle has a definite location and a definite speed is no longer allowed; that is
wrong. To give an example of how wrong classical physics is, there is a rule in
quantum mechanics that says that one cannot know both where something is and
how fast it is moving. The uncertainty of the momentum and the uncertainty of
the position are complementary, and the product of the two is constant. We can
write the law like this: Ax Ap > h/2w, but we shall explain it in more detail later.
This rule is the explanation of a very mysterious paradox: if the atoms are made
out of plus and minus charges, why don't the minus charges simply sit on top of
the plus charges (they attract each other) and get so close as to completely cancel
them out? Why are atoms so big? Why is the nucleus at the center with the
electrons around it? It was first thought that this was because the nucleus was so
big; but no, the nucleus is very small. An atom has a diameter of about 10~8 cm.
The nucleus has a diameter of about 103 cm. If we had an atom and wished to
see the nucleus, we would have to magnify it until the whole atom was the size of
a large room, and then the nucleus would be a bare speck which you could just
about make out with the eye, but very nearly all the weight of the atom is in that
infinitesimal nucleus. What keeps the electrons from simply falling in? This
principle: If they were in the nucleus, we would know their position precisely, and
the uncertainty principle would then require that they have a very large (but
uncertain) momentum, i.e., a very large kinetic energy. With this energy they
would break away from the nucleus. They make a compromise: they leave themselves
a little room for this uncertainty and then jiggle with a certain amount of
minimum motion in accordance with this rule. (Remember that when a crystal
is cooled to absolute zero, we said that the atoms do not stop moving, they still
jiggle. Why? If they stopped moving, we would know where they were and that
they had zero motion, and that is against the uncertainty principle. We cannot
know where they are and how fast they are moving, so they must be continually
wiggling in there!)

Another most interesting change in the ideas and philosophy of science
brought about by quantum mechanics is this: it is not possible to predict exactly
what will happen in any circumstance. For example, it is possible to arrange an
atom which is ready to emit light, and we can measure when it has emitted light
by picking up a photon particle, which we shall describe shortly. We cannot,
however, predict when it is going to emit the light or, with several atoms, which
one is going to. You may say that this is because there are some internal " wheels "
which we have not looked at closely enough. No, there are no internal wheels;
nature, as we understand it today, behaves in such a way that it is fundamentally
impossible to make a precise prediction of exactly what will happen in a given
experiment. This is a horrible thing; in fact, philosophers have said before that
one of the fundamental requisites of science is that whenever you set up the same

conditions, the same thing must happen. This is simply not true, it is not a fundamental
condition of science. The fact is that the same thing does not happen,
that we can find only an average, statistically, as to what happens. Nevertheless,
science has not completely collapsed. Philosophers, incidentally, say a great deal
about what is absolutely necessary for science, and it is always, so far as one can
see, rather naive, and probably wrong. For example, some philosopher or other
said it is fundamental to the scientific effort that if an experiment is performed in,
say, Stockholm, and then the same experiment is done in, say, Quito, the same
results must occur. That is quite false. It is not necessary that science do that;
it may be a fact of experience, but it is not necessary. For example, if one of the
experiments is to look out at the sky and see the aurora borealis in Stockholm,
you do not see it in Quito; that is a different phenomenon. " But," you say, " that
is something that has to do with the outside; can you close yourself up in a box
in Stockholm and pull down the shade and get any difference?" Surely. If we take
a pendulum on a universal joint, and pull it out and let go, then the pendulum
will swing almost in a plane, but not quite. Slowly the plane keeps changing in
Stockholm, but not in Quito. The blinds are down, too. The fact that this happened
does not bring on the destruction of science. What is the fundamental hypothesis of
science, the fundamental philosophy? We stated it in the first chapter: the sole
test of the validity of any idea is experiment. If it turns out that most experiments
work out the same in Quito as they do in Stockholm, then those "most experiments" will be used to formulate some general law, and those experiments which
do not come out the same we will say were a result of the environment near
Stockholm. We will invent some way to summarize the results of the experiment,
and we do not have to be told ahead of time what this way will look like. If we
are told that the same experiment will always produce the same result, that is all
very well, but if when we try it, it does not, then it does not. We just have to take
what we see, and then formulate all the rest of our ideas in terms of our actual
experience.

Returning again to quantum mechanics and fundamental physics, we cannot
go into details of the quantum-mechanical principles at this time, of course, because
these are rather difficult to understand. We shall assume that they are there,
and go on to describe what some of the consequences are. One of the consequences
is that things which we used to consider as waves also behave like particles, and
particles behave like waves; in fact everything behaves the same way. There is no
distinction between a wave and a particle. So quantum mechanics unifies the idea
of the field and its waves, and the particles, all into one. Now it is true that when
the frequency is low, the field aspect of the phenomenon is more evident, or more
useful as an approximate description in terms of everyday experiences. But as the
frequency increases, the particle aspects of the phenomenon become more evident
with the equipment with which we usually make the measurements. In fact, al-
though we mentioned many frequencies, no phenomenon directly involving a frequency
has yet been detected above approximately 1012 cycles per second. We
only deduce the higher frequencies from the energy of the particles, by a rule which
assumes that the particle-wave idea of quantum mechanics is valid.
Thus we have a new view of electromagnetic interaction. We have a new kind
of particle to add to the electron, the proton, and the neutron. That new particle
is called a photon. The new view of the interaction of electrons and protons that
is electromagnetic theory, but with everything quantum-mechanically correct, is
called quantum electrodynamics. This fundamental theory of the interaction of
light and matter, or electric field and charges, is our greatest success so far in
physics. In this one theory we have the basic rules for all ordinary phenomena
except for gravitation and nuclear processes. For example, out of quantum electro - 
dynamics come all known electrical, mechanical, and chemical laws: the laws for
the collision of billiard balls, the motions of wires in magnetic fields, the specific
heat of carbon monoxide, the color of neon signs, the density of salt, and the
reactions of hydrogen and oxygen to make water are all consequences of this one
law. All these details can be worked out if the situation is simple enough for us to
make an approximation, which is almost never, but often we can understand more


or less what is happening. At the present time no exceptions are found to the
quantum-electrodynamic laws outside the nucleus, and there we do not know
whether there is an exception because we simply do not know what is going on in
the nucleus.
In principle, then, quantum electrodynamics is the theory of all chemistry,
and of life, if life is ultimately reduced to chemistry and therefore just to physics
because chemistry is already reduced (the part of physics which is involved in
chemistry being already known). Furthermore, the same quantum electrodynamics,
this great thing, predicts a lot of new things. In the first place, it tells the properties
of very high-energy photons, gamma rays, etc. It predicted another very re-
markable thing: besides the electron, there should be another particle of the
same mass, but of opposite charge, called a positron, and these two, coming together,
could annihilate each other with the emission of light or gamma rays.
(After all, light and gamma rays are all the same, they are just different points on
a frequency scale.) The generalization of this, that for each particle there is an
antiparticle, turns out to be true. In the case of electrons, the antiparticle has
another name—it is called a positron, but for most other particles, it is called anti 
so-and-so, like antiproton or antineutron. In quantum electrodynamics, two
numbers are put in and most of the other numbers in the world are supposed to
come out. The two numbers that are put in are called the mass of the electron and
the charge of the electron. Actually, that is not quite true, for we have a whole
set of numbers for chemistry which tells how heavy the nuclei are. That leads us
to the next part.

2-4 Nuclei and particles
What are the nuclei made of, and how are they held together? It is found
that the nuclei are held together by enormous forces. When these are released,
the energy released is tremendous compared with chemical energy, in the same
ratio as the atomic bomb explosion is to a TNT explosion, because, of course,
the atomic bomb has to do with changes inside the nucleus, while the explosion
of TNT has to do with the changes of the electrons on the outside of the atoms.
The question is, what are the forces which hold the protons and neutrons together
in the nucleus? Just as the electrical interaction can be connected to a particle,
a photon, Yukawa suggested that the forces between neutrons and protons also
have a field of some kind, and that when this field jiggles it behaves like a particle.
Thus there could be some other particles in the world besides protons and neutrons,
and he was able to deduce the properties of these particles from the already known
characteristics of nuclear forces. For example, he predicted they should have a
mass of two or three hundred times that of an electron; and lo and behold, in
cosmic rays there was discovered a particle of the right mass! But it later turned
out to be the wrong particle. It was called a ^-meson, or muon.
However, a little while later, in 1947 or 1948, another particle was found,
the ir-meson, or pion, which satisfied Yukawa's criterion. Besides the proton and
the neutron, then, in order to get nuclear forces we must add the pion. Now,
you say, "Oh great!, with this theory we make quantum nucleodynamics using
the pions just like Yukawa wanted to do, and see if it works, and everything will
be explained." Bad luck. It turns out that the calculations that are involved in
this theory are so difficult that no one has ever been able to figure out what the
consequences of the theory are, or to check it against experiment, and this has
been going on now for almost twenty years!
So we are stuck with a theory, and we do not know whether it is right or wrong,
but we do know that it is a little wrong, or at least incomplete. While we have
been dawdling around theoretically, trying to calculate the consequences of this
theory, the experimentalists have been discovering some things. For example,
they had already discovered this ^-meson or muon, and we do not yet know where
it fits. Also, in cosmic rays, a large number of other "extra" particles were found.
It turns out that today we have approximately thirty particles, and it is very
difficult to understand the relationships of all these particles, and what nature

wants them for, or what the connections are from one to another. We do not today
understand these various particles as different aspects of the same thing, and the
fact that we have so many unconnected particles is a representation of the fact
that we have so much unconnected information without a good theory. After
the great successes of quantum electrodynamics, there is a certain amount of
knowledge of nuclear physics which is rough knowledge, sort of half experience
and half theory, assuming a type of force between protons and neutrons and seeing
what will happen, but not really understanding where the force comes from.
Aside from that, we have made very little progress. We have collected an enormous
number of chemical elements. In the chemical case, there suddenly appeared
a relationship among these elements which was unexpected, and which is embodied
in the periodic table of Mendeleev. For example, sodium and potassium are
about the same in their chemical properties and are found in the same column
in the Mendeleev chart. We have been seeking a Mendeleev-type chart for the
new particles. One such chart of the new particles was made independently by
Gell-Mann in the U.S.A. and Nishijima in Japan. The basis of their classification
is a new number, like the electric charge, which can be assigned to each particle,
called its "strangeness," S. This number is conserved, like the electric charge, in
reactions which take place by nuclear forces.
In Table 2-2 are listed all the particles. We cannot discuss them much at
this stage, but the table will at least show you how much we do not know. Underneath
each particle its mass is given in a certain unit, called the Mev. One Mev
is equal to 1.782 X 10~27 gram. The reason this unit was chosen is historical,
and we shall not go into it now. More massive particles are put higher up on the
chart; we see that a neutron and a proton have almost the same mass. In vertical
columns we have put the particles with the same electrical charge, all neutral
objects in one column, all positively charged ones to the right of this one, and all
negatively charged objects to the left.

Particles are shown with a solid line and "resonances" with a dashed one.
Several particles have been omitted from the table. These include the important
zero-mass, zero-charge particles, the photon and the graviton, which do not fall into
the baryon-meson-lepton classification scheme, and also some of the newer
resonances (K*, ip, 17). The antiparticles of the mesons are listed in the table, but
the antiparticles of the leptons and baryons would have to be listed in another
table which would look exactly like this one reflected on the zero-charge column.
Although all of the particles except the electron, neutrino, photon, graviton, and
proton are unstable, decay products have been shown only for the resonances.
Strangeness assignments are not applicable for leptons, since they do not interact
strongly with nuclei.
All particles which are together with the neutrons and protons are called
baryons, and the following ones exist: There is a "lambda," with a mass of 1154
Mev, and three others, called sigmas, minus, neutral, and plus, with several masses
almost the same. There are groups or multiplets with almost the same mass, within
one or two percent. Each particle in a multiplet has the same strangeness. The
first multiplet is the proton-neutron doublet, and then there is a singlet (the
lambda) then the sigma triplet, and finally the xi doublet. Very recently, in 1961,
even a few more particles were found. Or are they particles? They live so short a
time, they disintegrate almost instantaneously, as soon as they are formed, that
we do not know whether they should be considered as new particles, or some kind
of "resonance" interaction of a certain definite energy between the A and w products
into which they disintegrate.
In addition to the baryons the other particles which are involved in the nuclear
interaction are called mesons. There are first the pions, which come in three varieties,
positive, negative, and neutral; they form another multiplet. We have also
found some new things called /ST-mesons, and they occur as a doublet, K+ and
K". Also, every particle has its antiparticle, unless a particle is its own antiparticle.
For example, the ir~ and the ir+ are antiparticles, but the ir° is its own antiparticle.
The K~ and K+ are antiparticles, and the K° and ~K°. In addition, in 1961 we also
found some more mesons or maybe mesons which disintegrate almost immediately.

A thing called w which goes into three pions has a mass 780 on this scale, and
somewhat less certain is an object which disintegrates into two pions. These particles,
called mesons and baryons, and the antiparticles of the mesons are on the
same chart, but the antiparticles of the baryons must be put on another chart,
"reflected" through the charge-zero column.
Just as Mendeleev's chart was very good, except for the fact that there were
a number of rare earth elements which were hanging out loose from it, so we have
a number of things hanging out loose from this chart—particles which do not
interact strongly in nuclei, have nothing to do with a nuclear interaction, and do
not have a strong interaction (I mean the powerful kind of interaction of nuclear
energy). These are called leptons, and they are the following: there is the electron,
which has a very small mass on this scale, only 0.510 Mev. Then there is that
other, the ^-meson, the muon, which has a mass much higher, 206 times as heavy
as an electron. So far as we can tell, by all experiments so far, the difference
between the electron and the muon is nothing but the mass. Everything works
exactly the same for the muon as for the electron, except that one is heavier than
the other. Why is there another one heavier; what is the use for it? We do not
know. In addition, there is a lepton which is neutral, called a neutrino, and this
particle has zero mass. In fact, it is now known that there are two different kinds
of neutrinos, one related to electrons and the other related to muons.
Finally, we have two other particles which do not interact strongly with the
nuclear ones: one is a photon, and perhaps, if the field of gravity also has a quantum - 
mechanical analog (a quantum theory of gravitation has not yet been worked
out), then there will be a particle, a graviton, which will have zero mass.
What is this "zero mass"? The masses given here are the masses of the
particles at rest. The fact that a particle has zero mass means, in a way, that it
cannot be at rest. A photon is never at rest, it is always moving at 186,000 miles a
second. We will understand more what mass means when we understand the theory
of relativity, which will come in due time.

Thus we are confronted with a large number of particles, which together seem
to be the fundamental constituents of matter. Fortunately, these particles are
not all different in their interactions with one another. In fact, there seem to be
just four kinds of interaction between particles which, in the order of decreasing
strength, are the nuclear force, electrical interactions, the beta-decay interaction,
and gravity. The photon is coupled to all charged particles and the strength of
the interaction is measured by some number, which is 1/137. The detailed law
of this coupling is known, that is quantum electrodynamics. Gravity is coupled
to all energy, but its coupling is extremely weak, much weaker than that of electricity.
This law is also known. Then there are the so-called weak decays 
beta decay, which causes the neutron to disintegrate into proton, electron, and
neutrino, relatively slowly. This law is only partly known. The so-called strong
interaction, the meson-baryon interaction, has a strength of 1 in this scale, and the
law is completely unknown, although there are a number of known rules, such
as that the number of baryons does not change in any reaction.

Table 2-3. Elementary Interactions

Coupling Strength Law
Photon to charged particles ~10~2 Law known
Gravity to all energy ~10~40 Law known
Weak decays ~10~5 Law partly known
Mesons to baryons ~ 1 Law unknown (some rules known)

* The "strength" is a dimensionless measure of the coupling constant involved in each
interaction (~ means "approximately").

This then, is the horrible condition of our physics today. To summarize it,
I would say this: outside the nucleus, we seem to know all; inside it, quantum
mechanics is valid—the principles of quantum mechanics have not been found to
fail. The stage on which we put all of our knowledge, we would say, is relativistic
space-time; perhaps gravity is involved in space-time. We do not know how the
universe got started, and we have never made experiments which check our ideas
of space and time accurately, below some tiny distance, so we only know that
our ideas work above that distance. We should also add that the rules of the game
are the quantum-mechanical principles, and those principles apply, so far as we
can tell, to the new particles as well as to the old. The origin of the forces in
nuclei leads us to new particles, but unfortunately they appear in great profusion
and we lack a complete understanding of their interrelationship, although we
already know that there are some very surprising relationships among them.
We seem gradually to be groping toward an understanding of the world of subatomic
particles, but we really do not know how far we have yet to go in this task.


