So, ok welcome to this ah course that fundamentals
of electrical engineering . So, before giving

you introduction just I like I would like
to tell one or two words, that is a this course

is mainly for the first year engineering students
where in fact, all the first year engineering

student can take this course and this is a
very basic course only at the beginning I

am telling that in the introduction ah you
know ah that a video that 5 minutes video,

their one thing I said only independent sources,
but ah I found at dependent sources also it

is very simple thing .
So, dependent sources also will be covered

so, those are the things and we will start
from the ah basic concepts right basic concepts

and from there will your what you call slowly
and slowly will move into you know much deeper

understanding and ah your first the dc part
will be covered and then your single phase,

three phases is circuit everything will be
covered may have your including resonance

or maximum importance for theorem and your
what you call that magnetically couple circuits.

And then whatever first year courses is there
for your transformer single phase transformer

your equivalent circuit and after voltage
regulation, then little bit of three phase

induction machine up to your equivalent circuit
as were as first year course is concern and

then that dca machine right so, this way let
us start first thing is that your basic concept

right. So, generally all branches of electrical
engineering actually are based on two thing

that is your electric circuit theory and elective
magne and electromagnetic theory, where is

the I mean this is the your what you call
will be that main two things.

So, several branches in electrical engineering
like power system, control system, ah electric

machines, instrumentation, then electronics,
then communication, all are based on your

electric circuit theory right .
So, this codes is mainly your what you call

that your ah suitable for your what you call
the first semester or your first year rather

electrical engineering student and so, we
will start ah from your very basic thing .

So, therefore, the basic electric circuit
theory course is your important course for

an electrical engineering student and of course,
and excellent starting point for a first semester

student or first year student in electrical
engineering education, electrical engineering

means it covers all the things like electrical,
then your electronics ecu call then your instrumentation.

So, everybody I mean all the specializing
in first year they can ah they can take this

course right and .
So, and basically ah if you think about electrical

engineering we are often interested that actually
electrical transfer in energy from one point

to another . This is ah this is common idea
you have when is look at that circuit at house

hold and you might have seen somewhere in
that power generic station right, but ultimate

thing is that you often interested in transferring
energy from one point to another that is also

your transferring energy. So, to do these
we require in interconnections of electrical

devices right .
So, and such interconnection is known as an

as your as an electric electric circuit like
if I mark it by this ah, if this thing this

plain we require an interconnection of electrical
devices and such interconnection is known

as an electric circuit right and each component
of the electric circuit is known as element.

So, what we need actually we require an interconnection
of electrical devices and interconnection

it will be through wires only conducting wires
only and such interconnection is known as

the electric circuit and each element of the
electric circuit is known as your element;

that means, each component of the electric
circuit is known as an element right .

Therefore, an electric circuit is an interconnection
of electrical elements . So, this is the your

what you call ah this is your ah the I mean
require may the your electrical elements and

electric circuit is an interview what you
call therefore, electrical interconnection

of electrical elements . So, just will come
to the figure one is shows a ah simple electric

circuit right so, it consist of 4 basic elements
look ah.

Just look at this circuit it consist of 4
basic element so, one is voltage source so,

this is very you know very basic things we
have started. So, this is a voltage source

representing says battery this symbol will
come later battery symbol will come later

ah this is the switch and this is ah conducting
material if you close, this which will be

close, if it is open it is open and this is
actually conducting wire there is a conductor

represent wire and this is the lamp and this
is the philament say it is a made of tungsten

right .
So, this is the simple circuit so, a lamp

connecting ah such a simple circuit has several
applications such as your torch light or search

light it is c . So, this is a simple electric
circuit now let us come to the voltage source

representing a battery.
So, basically what happen electrical charge

that is electron say in that it were writing
electron. So, we will flow through the circuit

due to chemical forces in the battery right
due to the chemical forces in the battery

of course, ah little bit of ah your battery
you calling little bit of ah physics your

in physics you have studied the battery is
right .

So, here will not ah your what you call here
will not cover to the chemical reaction another

thing, but some whatever we have learn from
there only we talk about that . So, will flow

through the circuit due to the chemical forces
in the battery the charge gains energy from

chemicals in the battery ah and delivers energy
to the lamp right. So, these negating charge

I will come to little bit later . So, the
charge actually gains energy from the chemicals

and your in the battery and delivers energy
to the lamp the actually the from here actually

energy is coming to the lamp right and the
battery voltage is a measure of the energy

gained by unit of charge as if moves through
the battery.

Later will see the your voltage another things
, but the battery voltage is a measure of

the energy gain by unit of charge as it moves
through the battery, but of course, if the

switch is switch ah switch is closed right,
but one thing is that that suppose this conductor

wire suppose it is a hm your it is a your
ah what you call that, copper wires and the

plastic insulation will be there right and
this is the tungsten, tungsten wire actually

is not a good ah your what you call a conductor
as compared to the copper will come to that

right.
And, but question is the wires are of made

of copper conductor I just told you and had
insulator from one another by electrical insulation

coating the your coating the wire that you
have seen that you have seen . So, electrons

actually readily move through the copper conductor,
but not through the plastic insulation . So,

this wire is there, but it is your plastic
insulation right and that switch I told you

it will allow this allow the current . If
you close the switch current will flow if

you just open it and current will not flow
.

So, and the lamp actually I told you it contains
ah tungsten wire it can withstand high temperature

. So, tungsten is not as will be as your electrical
conductor or as copper and electrons actually

experience collisions with the atoms of the
tungsten right and ah that is the tungsten

wires, because that if that is to the copper
conductor that your what you call charge or

electron is flowing and it will make a your
what you call collision with the atoms of

the tungsten wire . So, therefore, resulting
in heating of the tungsten and we can say

that tungsten wire had electrical resistance
.

So, thus energy is transferred by the chemical
action in the battery to the electrons right

and then to the tungsten where it appears
as heat. So, the tungsten becomes hot enough

so, that light is emitted . So, I will put
a question to you that your a that is your

is many questions on this thing when I will
move ah that ah . So, whatever that electrons

flow just let me go to this circuit ah just
hold on, hm ah is that actually electrons

is flowing through this copper conductor,
when it come to that is at collision actually

we that of the tungsten and therefore, it
is causing as you know ah heat .

So; that means, we can say the tungsten has
an electrical resistance right and I will

put a question here that we have seen that
your ah that bulb 40 vat, 60 vat, and 100

watt and so on . So, they have all the filaments
tungsten filaments say so, a question to what

is the diameter on this, your this tungsten
filament because if you see then you will

find it is look like a coin right and what
is that your diameter of this tungsten filament

this is a question to you .
So, this is actually your, what you call ah

that, how that we get that, your bulb ah this
thing right ah. So, 40 watt ah that later

will see 40 watt, 60 watt or 100 watt right.
Therefore, the energy is transfer by the chemical

action in the battery because battery has
a chemical action. So, that energy is transformed

in the electrons and then to the tungsten
where it appears as the heat. So, tungsten

becomes hot enough so, that light is emitted
. So, this is a basic philosophy you have

your what you call that is simple circuit
is simple dc volt a simple switch wires and

your tungsten lamp. Whatever you see in that
your what you call 40, 60, your 80 ah sorry

100 watt bulbs.
So, now system of unit actually in all electrical

engineer is this thing we deal with several
measurable quantity like quantities like voltage

your then ah current ampere right power watt
and so on . So; however, I have measurement

must be communicated in a standard language,
such that all engineering professionals can

understand irrespective of the country where
the measurement is conducted such an international

measurement language is the international
system units.

That is we call in short SI unit right, it
is a international system units we call SI

units right . So, adopted by the general conference
on weights are measured that was in 1960.

So, we follow that your what you call that
SI is SI units, we call international system

u of units in sort we call other way we call
is SI right. So, basically in this international

system there are 6 principal units ah basically
6 only 6 principal unit, we need from which

the units of all other physical quantities
can be obtain right.

So, just I am giving with this 6 units so,
table 1.1 it shows the 6 principal units you

needs and there symbols the SI units are use
through the throughout the world right.

So, one major advantage of the SI unit is
that, it uses prefix says based on the power

obtain and to relates smaller and larger units
to the basic units. So, table 1.2 shows SI

prefixes and that symbols will come to that
first this 6 basic SI units right .

So, this is the your 6 base, one is luminous
intensity candela that is it call cd, another

is the thermodynamic temperature Kelvin in
sort ah in your symbol is K and is the length

meter symbol is m, another is mass kilogram
it is kg, another is time it is second, an

electric current in ampere A this is the 6
standard international or your what you call

SI units form which other can be other can
be obtain . So, this is the stat 6 say your

basic SI units. So, it should be in your mind
and then your table 1.2 it is actually will

see that the SI prefixes .
So, ah there are many 1 or 2, I am making

that like if it is 10 to the power 18 it call
exa it is symbol is capital E, you know this

is 10 to the power 15 you call peta it is
capital is ah your what capital P, we call

10 to the power 12 you call tera ah it is
T, then 10 to the power 9 right so, it is

giga it is G, then when come 10 to the power
6 ah it is mega right it is M and so on, 10

to the power 3 is actually it is a not coming
to ah alien to this, but 10 to the power 3

means kilo. So, accordingly number accordingly
numbering you can make it right it is k so,

these way your deka, desi, centi, milli, micro
all.

But last one is 10 to the power minus 18 it
is call atto in small a we call a, 10 to the

power minus 15 it is called femto f and 10
to the power minus 12 it is pico p and so

on . So, from 10 to the power 18 the 10 to
the power plus 18 to 10 to the power minus

18 these are actually your, what you call
the SI prefixes this is multiply this is prefix

and these are the symbols. So, first basic
6 SI units and these are your what you call

the SI prefixes so, this we should know right.
Next is the charge and current . Now, the

concept of electric charge is the underlying
principle of explaining all electrical phenomena,

the most basic quantity in an electric circuit
is the electric charge, here we will review

some important characteristic of electric
charge .

Then will come to the current actually current
is the rate of change of your what you call

the charge flow . So, will come to that the
first one is the charge is bipolar, meaning

that electrical effects are observed in ah
your are describe in terms of positive than

negative charges right. So, charge is bipolar
so, it means electrical effects are describe

in terms of positive and your negative charges
the first thing.

Second thing is according to experimental
observation, the only charges that occur in

nature are integral multiplies of the electronic
charge that e is equal to this will know from

your class 12 physics also, e is equal to
minus 1.602 into 10 to the power minus 19

coulomb right . So, this is your the only
charges that occur in nature or integral multiples

or the electronic charge that is this value
.

And third point is the electrical effects
are attributed to both the separation of charge

and your charges in motion and the fourth
point is the law of conservation of charge

state that charge can neither be created nor
destroyed only transferred right; So, it neither

you can create nor you can destroy only it
can be transferred right, thus the algebraic

sum of the electric charge is a system does
not change .

So, the fourth one is very important right
ah so, this should be in your mind . So, effects

of electric charge can be experience when
we carry to a remove our woollen sweater I

mean you might have seen also remove our woollen
sweater and have it stick to our body or walk

across a carpet and receive a shock, other
electrical charge I mean if you I mean when

remove our your woollen sweater you know you
can see that it is your sticking and our body

this is due to the electric charge or sometimes
so, we get some kind of shock when you are

working you know you receive a shock when
you are working only carpet .

Other thing is that ah you take a very small
pieces of paper and keep it and if you raw

away take a plastic and raw we can your hair
and just after that you ah hold it on the

piece of paper you will find that all piece
of papers are attracted towards their what

you call towards that your that plastic right
you can experience of your own so, any way

.
So, therefore, charge is an electrical property

of the atomic particles of which matter consists
measured in coulomb. So, charge unit of charge

is a coulomb and it is an electrical property
of the atomic particles of which matter actually

consist so, measure in coulomb .
Now, consider the flow of electric charges

a so, actually this is actually you do not
look it this as the page number right . So,

now, consider the flow of electric, a unique
feature of electric charge is that it can

be transfer from one place to another place
; that means, it is mobile ; that means, charge

can be transfer for one place to another.
So, in cities mobile when it can be converted

to another form of energy right and the motion
of charge creates and electric your fluid

we call it is current .
So, the little bit way of to see that when

you, we know that a conducting wire consists
of several atoms right and a battery is a

source of electromagnetic force . So, conductor
conducting wire consist of several atoms and

a battery is a source of electrometric force,
when a conducting wire is connected to a battery

the very fast example what we saw that voltage
source is switch ah, conducting wires and

a transient lamp right .
The charges are compelled to move so, as soon

as a, you know battery is there a conducting
wire is there so, as soon as the connected

the wire that was the battery . So, what will
happen, charges are compute to move positive

charge is move in one direction and the negative
charges move in the opposite direction a very

simple logic this motion of charge is create
electric current .

Now, now which direction of the charge we
will consider the direction of the current,

convention is to take the current flow as
the movement of the positive charges that

is opposite to the flow of negative charge
is as shown in next figure 1.2 .

So, if you look at this, suppose this is battery
this is shown little bit you know bigger way

to show that your charge flowing. So, this
is actually negative charge flowing, this

is the negative terminal, this is the positive
terminal . So, the charge will flowing in

the direction of the your what you call positive
flow of charge so, this way.

So, that is the from plus so, this is the
convention so, this the direction of the current

or in other way it is opposite to the flow
of the negative charge, this is the flow of

negative charge it is move this is minus so,
it is moving in a other way . So, this is

actually convention therefore, if you look
into that the convention is, this is the convention

is to take the current flow or the movement
of positive charge is that is opposite to

the flow of the negative charges as shown
in figure this is figure 1.2.

So, the way the direction of the positive
flow charge is these are the direction of

the current or the opposite to the directive
flow of the charge . So, the electrical effects

caused by charges in motion depend on the
rate of charge flow, the rate of charge flow

is known as the electric current suppose if
q is the charge, t is the time and i is the

currents. So, i actually is equal to dq by
dt .

So, mathematically the relationship between
current and charge and time is different in

that i is equal to dq by dt this is a equation
1.1, that i is that current in ampere, q is

the charge in coulombs and t the time in second.
So, basically current is the your what you

call by is equal to dq by dt .
If note that 1 ampere is equal to 1 coulomb

per second; that means, if this side is 1
ampere this side it has to be 1. So, this

is coulomb, this is second so, it will be
1 coulomb per second right .

Suppose if q for example, a suppose ah you
take the data in such a fashion such that

the dq is 5 dt is also 5 so, that way . So,
it will be your what you call that per 1 coulomb

per second right . So, the charge transfer
between the time t 0 and t is obtain by integrating

both side of equation 1 we get; that means,
suppose at initial time t is equal to t 0

and your final time is t, then if you integrate
this equation if you get this equation therefore,

that q can be made that is equal to t 0 to
t idt ; that means, this one of you come that

your dq is equal to i into dt, therefore q
is equal to integral of t 0 to t then idt

.
So, that equation we are writing q is equal

to t 0 to idt; that means, charge transferred
right if between time t 0 and t. So, this

is the equation q is equal to t 0 to t idt,
this is equation 1.2 right so; that means,

equation 1 suggest that current need to be
a constant valued function that means, here

from this equation 1 it suggest that current
actually need to the constant valued function

right .
So, constant valued function as we will see

later that can be several types of current
that is your ah your charge can be vary with

time in several ways. We will see both bc
and ac, ac at the time you will see current

is time warring right and for dc actually
current is constant so, it will ah not time

warring right .
So, when a current is constant with time right,

we say that we have direct current that is
dc current, I will show you the diagram thus

a direct current is a current that remain
constant with time. So, I mean it is your

what you call it is your whatever may be the
time the current is constant .

On the other hand, a current that varies with
time and reversing direction periodically

that is plus minus plus minus say right is
call the alternating current, this alternating

current we will see for ac circuit not now,
but little bit of diagram and other things

I will show you for the sake of ah your what
you call understanding. So, thus an alternating

current is a current that varies with time
periodically right so, that means, it will

be plus minus plus minus .
So, alternating current is use in our house

hold the because all our household everything
is ac source, ac power right. So, ac circuit

will see later first bc then ac to run the
refrigerator, toaster, air conditioner and

other electrical appliances, whatever ac dense
will get these are all ah your ac power ac

voltage ac current right.
So, but dc it has current is constant so,

figure 1.3 actually shows the values of a
dc current and then sine sudden ac current

. So, in this case you are this is understand
the wave, this is sinusoidal and little bit

as portion as cutter or this is sinusoidal
or this is figure 1.3. So, this is a dc current,

this is current, this is time second, it is
the constant suppose current dc, current is

that 3 ampere it is constant right.
Final this is actually aperiodic this is periodically

changing from plus to minus . So, this is
ac current this is a cosine function and this

is your ac current it is given i is equal
to say cosine 2 pi ah your 2 pi ah, t just

hold on that this is the function, i is equal
to cos 2 pi t right. So, this is ac current

ac current will see later .
So, and this is a example of dc current, now

figure 1.4; that means, this one such the
other types of time warring current such as

the triangular and square wave, this is also
time warring current this is triangular function

this is current and this is also it is rectangular
one, this is also changing periodically. So,

plus minus, this is also, this is triangular
wave from this is square wave from this is

also alternating, alternating current right
.

So, now as we have seen earlier the direction
of current flow is conventionally taken as

the direction of positive charge movement
I told you, that current when you take the

battery symbol plus minus form the plus the
positive charge is flowing. So, that is why

is taken has direction of the positive charge
movement.

So, based on this convention a current of
4 amperes say may be represented your positively

or negatively, this is shown in figure 5 where
a lamp is connected in series with a battery

look how it is .
Starting from this ah let us will try to understand

the if we start to understand everything the
later stage we will find things say are things

are become very simple to us . So, what will
do, the just tried to understand the basic

flow basic understanding if this is clear
then you will find circuit theory this ah

your what you call this circuit pattern another
thing is a very simple for example, this is

a battery, that is a battery symbol another
thing so, will come later.

There is a battery, this is plus symbol, minus
symbol and this is your ah 2 terminals are

mark 1 and 2 right and this is your say tungsten
lamp, this is a lamp and when you take the

4 ampere current says flowing say 4 ampere
current is flowing . So, it is 1 to 2 it is

given 1 to 4 ampere, then what will be I to
21 it will just opposite know it will be minus

4 because this current actually moving like
this ah, when you take this current is coming

like this I 12 and, but when you take reverse
a direction that I 21 it will be minus 4 ampere

.
So, in this figure I 12 is 4 ampere this means

that current through the lamp with it a reference
direction pointing from 1 to 2, that this

is a reference direction 1 to 2 that if you
take 12 to 4 ; that means, current is flowing

4 ampere 1 to 2 positive right , but if you
take other way or suppose if you take 2 to

1 that it will just negative sine it will
be minus 4 ampere, if you take 2 to 1, just

reversal of the your what you call the direction
because here we have taken I 12 here we have

taken I 21 .
Therefore, your ah I 21 is the current to

the with it is reference directed from 2 to
1 of course, I 12 and I 21 are the same in

magnitude and opposite in sign so, because
they denote the same current, but with opposite

direction. Thus we have I 12 is equal to minus
I 21 is equal to 4 ampere that magnitude is

same , but I 12 is 4 ampere therefore, I 21
is equal to minus 4 ampere so, this is equation

1.3 .
So, this part is very simple, but understandable

if you ; that means, direct reference direction
1 to 2 means from 1 to 2 4 ampere if you take

this is reference written 2 to 1 the sine
is change, then I 21 should be minus 4 ampere

therefore, I 12 is equal to minus I 21 is
equal to 4 ampere, current magnitude will

remain same only the sine part right other
way. So, this is actually little bit understanding

of the current, next is the voltage .
So, now current part is voltage, as explain

in the previous section just now to move the
electron in a conductor in a particular direction

if require some work or energy is transfer
right . So, this work actually is done by

external electric electro ah motive force
emf, typically represented by the battery

as shown in figure 1.2 right so, this is your
figure 1. 2 .

So, this is actually external electromotive
force emf, typically represent by the battery

figure 1.2 will come, this emf now this figure
1.2 you have seen that your one ah voltage

source, then your what you call the transient
filament law right. This emf is also known

as potential difference or we call sometimes
voltage right, actually ah whenever positive

and negative charges are separated energy
is expanded.

So, this emf is also known as the potential
difference and voltage . So, actually whenever

positive and negative charges are separated
energy actually is expanded . So, voltage

is the energy per unit charge created by the
separation. Thus the voltage say V 12 between

2 points, 1 and 2 in an electric circuit it
is something like this suppose ah ah electric

ah . This is your actually 2 points say will
come to that other thing, this is the 2 point

this is 1 and 2 and this is the voltage say
V 12 and this is the lamp right .

Therefore when you come here thus the voltage
V 12 between 2 points say 1 and 2 in an electric

circuit is that energy or work needed to move,
a unit charge from 1 to 2. We express this

ratio in differential form that is b is equal
to small v is equal to capital V 12 suffix

is equal to d w upon dq, for w is the energy
in joules, q is the charge in coulombs and

V 12 the voltage in volts . So, voltage actually
that is your V 12 actually dw of dw by dq

the w is the energy ah energy in joules and
q the charge in coulomb.

So, in equation so, this is actually your
equation 1.4 therefore, equation 1.4 it is

evident that 1 volt is equal to if it is this
side is 1 volt it will be 1 joule per coulomb

. So, that is why it is 1 joule per coulomb
or 1 joule is equal to your 1 Newton meter.

So, one Newton meter per coulomb, but 1 joule
per coulomb there will be used .

So, thus voltage or potential difference is
the energy required to move a unit charge

through an element right you will just I just
I say thus why underline the voltage or potential

difference is the energy require to move a
unit charge through an element like figure

look at the figure, figure 1.6 source the
voltage that was a lamp connected between

points 1 and 2, the plus and minus symbol
sines are also given . So, this is the polarity

this is 1 and this is 2, 1 is positive, 2
is negative. So, sines are used to represent

reference direction of voltage polarity .
So, the voltage V 12 to can be interpreted

as your in 2 ways first thing is this point
you try to understand first one is the point

1 is at a potential of V 12 volts higher than
point 2, look at this diagram right, it this

point is your at a potential of V 12 higher
than this your ah your what you call that

ah other point 2. So; that means, point 1
is at a potential of V 12 volts higher than

point 2 or the potential at point 1 with respect
to point 2 is V 12 or the potential at point

1 with respect to point 2 is V 12 second one
easy at to remember right.

So, this is the concept the plus minus right
. So, in this case either point 1 is at potential

or V 12 volts higher than point 2 or the potential
at point 1 with respect to point 2 is V 12

right . So, therefore, the logically it follows
that V 12 is equal to minus V 21 ; that means,

if you take say we suffer example say just
for example, say V 12 is equal to just one

minute ah say ah ah .
Sir transient .

May maybe is could.
Ah white white board.

white board .
Ok

Thank you we will be back again
Thank you.

