Ok. So, come back to you know this V 12 and
V 2 1 for example, right.

So, ah that ah this is actually this is point
1 right.

And this is your your lamp right this is I
am drawing something like this this is your

lamp and this is your point 2 this is point
2 this is plus this is minus. So, this voltage

is your V 1 2 right. So, if V 1 2 is equal
to say a 10 volt this is plus minus therefore,

V 2 1 V 2 1 will be minus 10 volt right. ah
If you make V 1 2 that is if this is plus

this is minus may be 10 volt, then V 2 1 will
be minus 10 volt this is understandable right.

. So, . So, so size are used to represent
the reference direction of voltage polarity.

The voltage V 1 2 can be interpreted I told
you this one that best way this one the potential

point 1 with respect to point 2 is V 1 2 therefore,
logically it follows that just I told you

that V 1 2 if V 1 2 is 10 volt then V 2 1
will be minus 10 volt therefore V 1 2 is equal

to say minus V 2 1.
So, for the purpose of further explanation

come to the figure 1.7 right 2 representation
of the same ah same voltage you come here

right.
For example come here. So, here it is point

1 it is 1 and 2 this is a lamp.
So, it is 10 volt. So, point ah meaning is

point 1 is 10 volt above point 2 this is the
meaning right similarly if it is ah this is

1 this is 2 now polarity has changed suppose
this is minus this is plus. So, this has been

minus and this has been made plus and this
has become made minus. Therefore, say this

one also can be like this is a plus this is
a plus thing. So, point 2 is minus 10 volt

above point 1. So, whenever you talk like
this, you take plus as their reference point

right. If I if it is like if it is given like
this; that means, point 1 that is a plus terminal

point 1 is 10 volt above point 2.
And here it is ah here it is 2 ah here it

is minus 1, but minus 10 volt; that means,
point 2 is minus 10 volt above point 1 understandable

right understandable you will take this is
plus terminal as your reference point from

there you will take meaning is same. So, here
it is point 2 is minus 10 volt above point

1, here it is point 1 is 10 volt above point
2 understandable right . So, 2 equivalent

representation of the same voltage V 1 2 either
this representation or that representation

both are equivalent to each other right.
So, whatever whatever was ah whatever was

there, that has been just now that has been
explained. Therefore, therefore, this ah your

in general a voltage drop from 1 to 2 is equivalent
to the voltage rise from 2 to 1 meaning is

same meaning is same. So, next is power and
energy.

So, power and energy calculation are very
important in circuit analysis because only

current and voltage actually both do not serve
all the purpose because output maybe power.

For example, suppose at your residence the
bulb is there tube light is there these are

all represented by power.
So, therefore, voltage and current are useful

variables in an electric circuit, but they
are not sufficient by themselves. One reason

is that useful output of the system often
is non electrical and this output is conveniently

expressed in terms of power and energy. And
second thing is that output or if you take

an electrical elements or devices their power
output is maybe limited maybe 40 watt maybe

4 thousand watt, but it is limited right.
So, another reason is that all practical devices

have limitation on the amount of power that
they can handle just ah some devices or specification

is there. If you see anything can be bulb
or any light or fan, you will find some specification

is there and one important specification is
the power right. For example, you all know

from our experience that is 60 watt bulb gives
more light than a 40 watt bulb because ah

60 watt is powerful than 40 watt we also know
that when we ah pay our electricity bills

we are actually paying for the electric energy
that is watt hour consume over a certain period

of time right we or that ah whatever electric
bill if you ah pay this is watt hour.

In general it will higher you ah your higher
values of unit that is kilo watt hour right.

So, ah sometimes in in this rhymes we define
energy like this that energy is power multiplied

by hour because if you look it that energy
is power multiplied by hour because it is

a watt hour watt into hour right. So, ah . So,
we know we now we now relate the power and

energy to voltage and current, because we
have to relate now power and energy to the

voltage as well as the current. So, power
is the time rate of a expanding or a absorbing

energy.
So, power is measured in watts. So, mathematically

p is equal to dw by dt, it is actually your
what you call that is a time rate of a expanding

or absorbing energy. So, it is p is equal
to dw by dt where p is the power in watts

right w is the energy in joules right and
t is the time in second. So, that is one watt

from this equation one watt is equal to your
one joule per second it is one joule per second

right. So, once again the power actually is
measure in watts. So, mathematically this

is p dw by dt and ah from that from that physics
the definition is power is the time rate of

expanding or absorbing energy. Simply do not
write the power is the time rate of energy

then it is not correct better you should write
power is the time rate of expanding or absorbing

energy right.
So, therefore, from equation 1.1 we have seen

right I is equal to dq by dt and so on. So,
and 1.4 and 1.6 this equation is 1.6 therefore,

p is equal to dw by dt is equal to we can
write this equation dw by dq into dq by dt

right and dw by dq we have seen it is V and
from equation 1.1 I is equal to dq by dt it

is I from equation 1.4 it is your dw by dq
is equal to v.

So, p is equal to v into i right. So, this
is actually p is a power. So, this is equation

7. I think I need not write it again now it
is understandable that, dw by dt we write

it in partial derivative that your ah chain
chain rule of their differentiation rather,

but dw by dq into dq by dt. And dw by dq is
equal to v and dq if that is d dw by dq is

equal to V that is from equation 1.4 and i
is equal to your dq by dt that is from equation

1.1. So, power is equal to voltage into current
right.

So, equation 1.7 shows the power associated
with basic circuit elements is simply the

product of the current in the element and
the voltage across the element. Therefore,

power is a quantity associated with the pair
of terminals and we have to be able to tell

from our calculation whether power is being
delivered to the element or supplied by the

element. If the power has a plus sign this
is ah this is interesting this you have to

understand if the power has a plus sign power
is been delivered to or absorbed by the element.

If power is a plus sign right or ah later
we will see in the numericals and other thing,we

will be accustomed with this and if on the
other hand the power has a minus sign right

that is power is being supplied by the element
so, but ah ah, but ah how do we know when

the power has a positive or a negative sign
right. So, this is the question ah. So, polarity

of voltage and direction of current play a
major role in determine the sign of power

it is therefore, your important to see this
right. So, this one ah look at this one .

This is a simple circuit element say something
it is say it is something. So, this is plus

this is minus right. So, current is this current
is plus ah sorry this terminal is plus current

is flowing from this direction and here actually
what we will do that, whenever whenever a

current your entering the positive terminal
you will take the sign of current is positive.

So, this current is entering the terminal
means from plus terminal the current is flowing

So, p is equal to v into i right. So, that
is why the power is positive; that means,

this element actually is absorbing the electrical
power so; that means, ah when i is leaving

the plus terminal or entering into the plus
terminal right. So, not leaving when its entering

into the your what you call this this your
plus terminal; that means, current flowing

in this direction. So, p is equal to v i.
Now ah it is actually entering the terminal

and when the current is leaving the plus terminal
you take minus sign, at the same time you

can understand that actually the i the current
is going into the element from plus.

So, current is your what you call entering
into the plus terminal and when current is

leaving the plus terminal it is leaving leaving
the plus terminal. So, current signs ah your

symbol i you will take ah your direction it
will be negative. So, p is equal to minus

vi v inverse as it is v, but i is there is
a sign will change it will be minus vi right

this thing you have to ah this is absorbing
power and this ah in this case element is

supplying power, because p is equal to minus
v into a i right.

So, one is entering into this your what you
call plus terminal, another is leaving the

plus terminal. So, when it is entering into
the plus terminal sign should sign of current

should be plus and when is leaving the plus
terminal it should be minus. This certain

things I mean basic thing you have to keep
it in mind right. So, so reference polarities

for power using the passive sign convention.
Now in order to power have a positive sign

right the direction of current and this ah
this ah rate thing is nothing actually right.

So, direction of current and polarity of voltage
must confirm with those shown in figure 1.8

a and b. Now whatever I told right by the
passive sign convention current enters through

the positive polarity of the voltage and this
case p is equal to vi, because this current

is entering through their positive polarity.
Whenever current entering through the positive

polarity. So, sign i that current ah your
ah sign it should be taken as a plus that

is why p is equal to plus vi and in this case
current this thing current is leaving the

plus terminal we should take minus that is
why p is equal to minus vi right.

Therefore. So, by the passive sign convention
current enters through the positive polarity

of the voltage, and this case p is equal to
vi; that means, vi greater than 0 right. So,

vi greater than 0 implies that the element
is ah absorbing power and when p is equal

to when p is equal to minus vi right. So,
element your what you call in this case vi

negative as figure b the element actually
is releasing or supplying power. Throughout

the text or throughout this course we will
follow the passive sign convention.

So, I suggest once again ah when we because
later stage we will solve any problem is another

thing. So, basic thing should be initially
ah it should be clear right so; that means,

when current entering to the positive terminal
i should be positive, when current leaving

the your positive terminal i should be negative.
So, when it is positive then it is element

is absorbing power when it is negative element
this element minus vi means it is supplying

or delivering power right that is why it is
minus vi .

So,. So, passive sign convention is satisfied
I told you when the current enters through

the positive terminal of an element and p
is equal to plus vi; however, if the current

enters your through the negative terminal,
then p is equal to minus vi; that means, if

you look at the diagram other way I think
it is ah current entering through the negative

terminal here also I have made I here it is
ah another way is that current entering through

the positive terminal it is i. So, p is equal
to plus vi current enter is your negative

terminal p is equal to minus vi. Otherwise
current entering through the positive terminal

or leaving through the negative terminal.
The way you can easy easiest way is current

entering through the positive terminal. So,
it is plus vi, current entering through the

negative terminal it is minus vi current entering
through the positive terminal element is absorbing

power, current entering through the negative
terminal element is supplying or delivering

power, I hope you have understood this right
this is require right.

So, in general we can write power absorbed
is equal to minus of power supplied. Same

concept like your ah the way it will be the
I 1 2 is equal to minus I 2 1, V 1 2 is equal

to minus your ah V 2 1 similar way you can
write plus power absorbed is equal to minus

power supplied because ah power balance or
energy balance equals to now this has to be

satisfied. Now now look at that figure ah
this figure figure one point it shows 2 cases

of element with absorbing power.
If you look into that ah if you look into

that here power entering into the sorry current
entering into the positive terminal this is

plus right and this is the 5 volt. So, what
will be the power? V is equal to 5 volt 4

is and I is equal to 4 ampere. So, power will
be 5 into 4. So, 20 watt right because current

entering into the positive terminal same thing
you look, this is at this is now we have made

this is 2 plus this is minus and it is here
it is in the a entering into the positive

terminal.
But here also if you look into that current

is entering through the positive terminal
because current goes like this goes like this

and goes like this right. So, in this case
your ah just hold on . So, in this case this

is i is equal to 4 ampere. So, this is that
your what you call current going like this

going like this going like this this is 4
ampere. So, current entering through the positive

terminal and in this case ah here also current
entering through the positive terminal goes

like this goes like this this is also 4 ampere.
So, ultimately both the cases current entering

through the positive terminal, but here it
is 1 2 here also 1 2, but this has been in

plus this has been in minus.
So, in this case also p is equal to 5 into

4 so; that means, your what you call 20 watts.
So, both the cases element actually is absorbing

the power right. So, both circuits apply it
is absorbing the power. So, so both the both

the your what you call ah both the ah circuit
actually absorbing the power. So, I hope you

have understood this right. So, so both the
circuit it is p is equal to 20 watt 5 into

4 here also 5 into 20 only thing is that.
We see that current entering through that

your positive terminal here also it goes like
this I showed you.

So, little bit you ah you know you should
understand this then things will be easier

for your later stage. Now this one now this
one if you look that 2 cases of an element

with a supplying of power. In this case if
you look that current actually entering into

the negative terminal just ah just I will
for your ah this thing I will ah ah just I

will ah make it like this for this one this
is 4 ampere. So, current is going like this.

So, it is this direction is given here. So,
current actually entering through the negative

terminal.
So, I should be taken as a negative. So, p

is equal to minus 4 into 5. So, minus 20 watt;
that means, this ah element actually supplying

the power. Similarly here also current is
entering into the negative terminal. So, it

is going like this. So, current enter into
the negative terminal, here also it is minus

your therefore, this will be minus 4 into
5. So, minus 20 watt; that means, power is

negative. So, this element is supplying power
right or delivering power right.

So, just hold on right. So, . So, this is
actually took minus 20 watt and minus 20 watt.

So, hope this one and this one concept is
clear to you right from the beginning ah in

this course, you have to you know if you ah
um ah your ah what you call if you make this

understanding is you know ah clear, then later
stage you will find things are very easy.

So, there should not be any confusion or anything
right. So, when you will go through this course

and when you will see if you have any doubt,
ah you can put the question and you are ask

a question or you know forum ah we will we
are there to ah your what you call answer

all your queries, but understanding is ah
your more important .

So, now for any electric circuit law of conservation
of energy must be obeyed right. For this reason

at any instant of time little bit I hope it
is ah underst[and]- ah it is it is your ah

your ah readable you can make it it must be
obeyed for this reason at any instant of time,

the algebraic sum of the power in a circuit
must be 0. T herefore, we can write in general

sigma power is equal to 0 sigma p is equal
to 0 our meaning is in a circuit you may have

many voltage sources and many electrical elements
right.

So, sources many cases power will be delivered
and power will be absorbed. So, total power

delivered right and total or in a other way
I can put that power delivered plus your power

your delivered or a supplied plus power absorbed
is equal to your 0. So, therefore, in this

case in the case of power also that your sigma
p is equal to 0; that means, summation of

all the power or later we will see later we
will see how this ah your what you call this

ah power delivered is equal to power absorbed
right that we will see later.

So, sigma in general summation is equal to
0 this is it. So, this equation 1.8, it confirms

you confirms the fact that the total power
supplied to the circuit your must bal is the

total power absorbed right. So, this is the
concept that way we write sigma p is equal

to 0; this one we will see much later when
I will take the example as it is as. Now to

calculate the energy w, supplied or absorbed
by a circuit element between time say t 0

and t we integrate power therefore, we know
that power is equal to your ah dw by dt right

therefore, dw is equal to I am not writing
understandable, earlier we have seen the power

is equal to dw by dt
So, dw will be is equal to pdt if you integrate.

So, w is equal to time t 0 to 2 pdt, but p
is equal to vi you substitute here p is equal

to vi therefore, time is t 0 to t dt right
therefore, this energy is the that therefore,

the energy is the capacity to do work. So,
energy is measured in joules. So, the w is

measured in joule right. So, the electric
power utility companies measure energy in

watt hour or kilo watt hour right . So, one
watt hour is equal to 3600 joules .

These are the standard ah this thing you can
you can you can keep it in your mind now we

will come to ah few small example right small
example. So, I hope up to this before going

to this this few more example, I hope up to
this you have your ah understood ah your what

you call the basic concept the current the
voltage the power and the passive sign convention

right and and and then in the case of power
that your what you call that ah plus or minus

that absorbed or delivered, similarly in the
case of voltage that which point is higher

than the other other point 1 point is higher
than ah higher point other point that ah per

your voltage, all this things hopefully you
have understood right

Therefore one hour is equal to 3600 joules
right now ah now come to that few simple examples

that how much charge is represented by 5524
electrons this is example 1.

So, each electron has e is equal to minus
1.602 into 10 to the power minus 19 coulomb

that we know here is 5524 electrons will have
minus 1.602 into 10 to the power minus 19

coulomb per electron into 5524 because each
electron has ah this thing this much of coulomb

that is why you writing; you are writing minus
1.602 into 10 to the minus coulomb per electron

you are writing into 5524 electrons. So, total
will be 8.849 into 10 to the power minus 16

coulomb right.
Here little bit has been cut ah for scanning.

So, this is actually coulomb now example 2;
the total charge entering a terminal is this

is actually this is actually page number ah
17 given by q is equal to say 3 t sin 2 pi

t ah say milli coulomb right. So, determine
the current at t is equal to 0.4 second. ah

Very simple thing q is given. So, we know
that i is equal to dq by dt. So, ddt of 3

t sin 2 phi t right. So, this is your 2 pi
t.

So, if you take the derivative of this one.
So, it is i is equal to 3 sin 2 pi t plus

6 pi t cosine of 2 pi t that is milli ampere
because it is it is is actually it is in milli

coulomb. So, that is why you are writing it
is milli ampere. So, at t is equal to 0.3

seconds. So, put here t is equal to 0.3 second.
So, in this case i is equal to 3 sin 2 pi

into 0.3 plus 6 pi into your 0.3 cosine of
2 pi into 0.3 milli ampere. So, ah after computing

this we will get i is equal to 1.106 milli
ampere at t is equal to 0.4 second right.

Ah ah . So, here know here actually here it
is it should be it should be your what you

call 0.3 because here I have taken t is equal
to 0.3 so, but here by you know while writing

is it has been made 0.4 it should be 0.3.
So, there should not be any confusion ah.

So, here ah it is a it is you know it is a
screen, we cannot ah make a correction here

ah. So, ah. So, it is actually this this one
actually will be ah um ah this one actually

will be t is equal to 0.3 huh. So, there should
not be any confusion. So, that is why here

we made t is equal to 0.3.
So, next one is determine the total charge

the example 1 0.3 determine the total charge
entering a terminal between t is equal to

2 second and t is equal to 4 second. So, current
passing through the terminal is given i is

equal to 2 t square minus t ampere.
This i is given right and time span is given

2 t is equal to 2 second to 4 second. So,
by using equation 1.2 that we know the i is

equal to dq by dt i is equal to dq by dt.
So, dq is equal to idt. So, q is equal to

integration ydt, but time limit is t 0 to
t. So, this is from equation 1.2 right. So,

it is t 0 is given this is given 2 t is equal
to 2 second and t is equal to 4 second. So,

here actually t 0 is equal to 2 second here
right this is t 0 equal to 2 second and this

is your t is equal to 4 second right. So,
it is 2 to 4 2 t square minus t into dt. So,

if you integrate this it will be 2 by 3 t
cube minus t square by 2 limit is 2 to 4.

If you simplify right. So, you will get q
is equal to 31.33 coulomb right. So, next

is example is say 1.4. So, charge versus time
for a given circuit element is your given

by qt is equal to 0 for t less than 0 right
and qt is equal to 2 minus 2 into e to the

power minus 100 t, for t greater than 0. you
have to plot qt and it versus time. Qt is

already given only it you have to plot it
you have to find out then plot both right.

So, solution we know that it is equal to dq
by dt.

So, it is given qt is equal to 0 for t less
than 0 right therefore, your it is actually

if you take the derivative also for t less
than 0. So, ah actually whenever we take then

it is less than 0 means say it is something
like this the past history of the circuit,

later later in transient we will try to see
this say it is past history of the circuit.

So, that is why its mathematically represent
that is your what you call that t less than

0. So, in this case qt is equal to 0.
So, for t less than 0. So, this is 0 and when

qt is equal to 2 minus 2 into e to the power
minus 100 t you take the derivative dqt by

dt. So, here if you do so, then it will be
200 e to the power minus 100 t for t greater

than 0. Now plot of qt and it shown in figure
2 this is the plot of your qt qt already given

right qt is already given right . So, in this
case if t is equal to you put in this expression,

if you put t is equal to 0 right then what
will be there the e to the power 0. So, actually

1. So, 2 minus 2 0.
So, graph starts from 0 and right and when

your when t is increasing it is in millisecond.
So, when t is increasing finally, it will

reach to the steady state the 2 right.
When here here when t is your increasing like

t greater than 0 and t is increasing say t
tends to infinity right so; that means, this

term will vanish only 2 will be there. So,
that is why it is your approaching and that

is qt is coulomb that is 2 coulomb and this
is the current right it is the current when

t is equal to 0, current is 200 ampere because
when t is equal to 0 this term is ah 1. So,

it is 200. So, it is starting from 200 right
And when t is your increasing, when t is increasing

this current actually approaching towards
0 and when t tends to infinity t is going

to infinity right this term will vanish it
will be 0. So, at steady state current will

be your 0. So, this is the plot of your this
thing it versus time and this is your qt versus

time this is the plot. So, a plot of charge
and this is the plot of current right.

So, example another example say 1.5, the current
flowing through an element is that i is equal

to one ampere for t greater than 0 and t less
than 1.

And second thing if it is 3 t square ampere
for t greater than 1 and in when current ah

time is in between 0 and 1, the current is
one ampere that is current is constant and

when for t greater than 1, it is 3 t square
ampere say it is given. So, we have to find

out the charge entering the element from t
is equal to 0 second to t is equal to 2 second

. So, this is the determining the charge entering
the element from t is equal to 0 second to

t is equal to 2 seconds.
So, we know that q is equal to t 0 to to idt

is just we have seen right and t 0 to t 1
idt plus t 1 to t i dt then you ah you have

a 2 time interval this is say t 0 and this
is t 1; t 1 is one second. So, 0 to 1. So,

t 0 to t 1. So, this is t 0 actually t 0 actually
0 and t 1 is one second right another thing

is you want in between 2 second. So, another
is that t 1 to t. So, t 1 again is one second

this is one and t is equal to 2 second. So,
2 I hope it is understandable to you because

ah ah ah when you are understanding this t
0 to t. So, that you have 2 intervals one

is 0 to 1 and another is t greater than 1,
but you have to find out in between 0 to 2

second.
So, 0 to 1 that is t 0 is equal to 0 and t

1 is equal to 1 right and then this one then
t 1 to t t 1 is equal to 1 then 1 to 2 second

and t is equal to 2 what is the idt this is
the idt. So, this can be written as 0 to 1,

i is equal to your 1 into dt because this
is giving one ampere. So, i is equal to in

this case i is equal to in between the interval
0 and 1, i is equal to one ampere. So, that

is why it is one into dt plus in between the
and when t greater than one it is 3 t square

a. So, 1to t 1 to , but we want to in between
0 and 2 seconds. So, 1 to 2 it will be 3 t

square into dt.
This simple thing, but I hope you have understood

this right when you will integrate and solve
it you will get q is equal to 8 coulomb this

is actually 8 c 8 coulomb right. So, I repeat
once again for your ah you know understanding

because and if you start in the very first
year that it is one in between 0 and one that

is this is t 0 is equal to 0 t 1 is equal
to 1, but you have to you have to determine

the charge entering the element from t is
equal to 0 second to t is equal to 2 second.

But first you have to consider this because
0 to 1. So, this is one ampere. So, ah t 0

to t idt and then t 0 to your what you call
ah this one t 0 to t 1 then t 1 to t right

t 1 to t and then your is equal to the 0 to
1 in between 0 to 1 current is one ampere.

So, one into dt plus that it is greater than
one therefore, it is one to 2 3 t square dt

because expression is 3 t square it is greater
than 1, but you one in between 1 and 2; that

means, this 3 t square d ah dt.
If you integrate this it will be your 1 plus

7. So, 8 coulomb right I hope you have understood
this simple thing now another thing another

example is this is actually page number 19
here. So, electrical energy is converted to

heat at the rate of 8 kilo joule per minute
in a resistor ah ah your what you call and

charge flowing through it at the rate of 300
coulomb per minute.

So, what is the voltage difference across
the resistor terminal? So, electrical energy

is converted to heat at the rate of 8 kilo
joule per minute in a resister and charge

flowing through it at the rate of 300 coulomb
per minute. So, what is the voltage difference

across the resistor terminal? So, in this
case we know that your v is equal to p upon

i right that is the power; that means, p is
given 8 kilo joule per minute. So, it is 8

into 10 to the power 3. So, 1000 joule per
minute and q is given that 300 coulomb per

minute. So, it is 300 coulomb per minute.
So, that is 26.67 joule per coulomb that is

the voltage joule per coulomb is equal to
voltage we have seen earlier

So, v is equal to 26.67 volt. So, ah. So,
and another thing is and a energy source your

forces a constant current of 4 ampere for
6 second to flow through a lamp. If 4 kilo

joule is given off in the form of light and
the and heat energy determine the voltage

drop across the lamp. So, it is telling that
energy source forces ah ah your what you call

a constant current of 4 ampere for 6 second
to flow through a lamp right.

Ah If 4 kilo joule is given off in the form
of light and heat energy determine the voltage

drop across the lamp. So, total charge is
q you know you know that i is equal to dq

by dt. So, in general we can write that ah
dq is equal to i dt. So, here we are writing

delta eq is equal to i into dt right. So,
delta eq. So, i is given 4 ampere this is

your 4 ampere the constant and your time t
is 6 second. So, delta t is equal to 6 second.

So, 4 into 6 that is 24 coulomb.
So, and the voltage drop you know voltage

is equal to that your potential difference
is equal to dw upon dq. So, the here we are

writing for the um your in v is equal to right
in delta w by delta eq. So, it is given 4

kilo joule. So, 4 into 10 to the power 3 divided
by delta q we got 24 coulomb. So, it is one

166.67 volt. Now 1.8 compute the power delivered
to an element at t is equal to 4 millisecond

ah if the current entering its positive terminal
is i is equal to 4 cos 100 pi t your ampere.

So, and the voltage is ah and the voltage
is a is equal to is given v is equal to 3

i one expression another is given v is equal
to 3 di by dt. So, the it is it is hours that

compute the power delivered to an element
at t is equal to 4 millisecond, if the current

entering its positive terminal is i is equal
to 4 cos 100 pi t ampere and the voltage is

v is equal to 3 i and v is equal to 3 di dt
right. So, solution is simple v is equal to

3 I so, 3 into 4 cross 100 pi t.
So, 12 cos 100 pi t; hence the power is p

is equal to v i listen one thing this is we
are covering ah then general it is a dc dc

circuit dc codes, but one or 2 simple example
of your sine cosine function I am taken and

detail sine cosine detailed ah your in terms
of sine cosine and single phase power or 3

phase power that will come when the ac circuit.
Here just to give you a feeling of that you

know time function power and this thing, but
later you will see that in single phase circuit

we will ah power your your power computation
is different and 3 phase also something interesting,

but here it is it is here simple it is given
in terms of time function just to give you

a feeling, but that this is ah just ah to
ah know little bit of energy power the basic

concept.
So,. So, p is equal to if you make vi, it

will be expression if you multiply all these
2 it will be 48 cos squared 100 pi t, but

when t is equal to 4 millisecond.
That is 4 into 10 to the power minus second

you substitute here t is equal to 4 your ah
millisecond, then you will get p is equal

to 48 cos square whatever its comes inside
you will get p is equal to 4.603 watt. Now

also another thing is given given that v is
equal to 3 di by dt.

So, it is 3 and ddt di is given the expression
of i is given 4 cos 100 pi t. So, here it

is your ah i is equal to 4 cos 100 pi t. Take
the derivative v is equal to minus 1200 pi

sin 100 pi t . So, p is equal to v into i.
So, this is the expression of v and this is

the expression of i 4 cos 100 pi t you multiply
right and you will get p is equal to minus

2400 pi sin 200 pi t at t is equal to 4 millisecond
that is 4 into 10 minus 3 second you put here

t is equal to 4 into 10 to the power minus
3 you put it here, you will get it is p is

equal to minus 4431.8 watt that is minus 4.4318
kilowatt right.

So, course. So, up to ah ah up to this ah
these are some more example we will see later.

So, up to this we will it will give you some
feeling, but regarding time ah variation of

current and voltage, but all time variation
other things we will see for single phase

thing, but this is a only first will be consider
you know ah dc circuit, basic ah concept,

then basic laws, basic theorems right this
is transient or first order circuit only and

ah next we will ah your what you call, but
these are the power cut ah your current everything

taken in time such such we will give some
flavor in the at the beginning right so.

Thank you very much .

