So, we have back again as we have studied
ah little bit of energy right what our so,

one different example then again we will go
to the circuit theory just to give you some

you know some ideas, regarding energy then
I for example, like this is example 1.12 that

is example 12. A residential consumer consumes
800 kilowatt hour in the month of March right

determine the electricity for the month using
the following rate schedule right.

For example base monthly charge is rupees
12 first 100 kilowatt hour per month at rupees

1.5 per kilowatt hour, say next 200 kilowatt
hour per month at rupees 2 per kilowatt hour

and over 200 kilowatt hour per month at rupees
2.5 kilowatt hour right .

Now, we have to calculate the electricity
bill so, base monthly charge is rupees 12

now 100 kilowatt hour at rupees 1.5 per kilowatt
hour therefore, 100 kilowatt hour at rupees

1.5. So, 100 into 1.5 so, it is rupees 150,
then next 200 kilowatt hour per month rupees

2 per kilowatt hour .
So, it is ah your next 200 kilowatt hour at

rupees 2 so, it is 2 into 200 so, rupees 400.
Now, totally is your 800 kilowatt hour, now

here it is 100 plus, 200, 300 kilowatt hour
already we have computed rupees 150 and 400

remaining will be 500 kilowatt hour , but
the 800 minus 100 minus 200 so, remaining

500 . So, 500 kilowatt hour remaining 500
kilowatt hour will be at rupees 2.5. So, it

is given 2.5 per kilowatt hour . So, rupees
2.5 per kilowatt hour so, 500 into 2.5. So,

rupees 1250, but monthly base charge is rupees
12. So, ru plus 150 plus 400 plus rupees 1250

if you add up all total charge will be rupees
1812 right .

Now, total your what you call ah, annual your
residential energy it is consume 800 kilowatt

hour. So, if you take the average. So, average
cost per this thing will be rupee or rupees

1812 divided by 800 kilowatt hour . So, that
comes approximately on an average rupees 2.265

per kilowatt hour and this is simple example,
because we have taken know that energy we

are talking of. So, just for p in to your
time power into time right ah, one ah before

going to the next example one sometimes we
call in English rhymes. That energy is power

multiplied by hour ah, another I can put in
better way that electrical energy is power

multiplied by hour right. So, that is kilowatt
hour, because kilowatt is the power and hour

is the time .
So, next is so, this is a simple example I

took for you. So, hope it is understandable
very simple thing right. Next example 13 so,

you have to determine the power absorbed or
supplied by each component of the circuit

as shown in figure 19, this is figure 19 this
is one electrical element is 5 voltage give

plus minus it consi, it actually either supply
it or a absorbed we will see later. That p

power, power p 1 this is a voltage source
right this at this is another dependent voltage

source and this is another, another source
is there, but the terminal plus minus 3 voltage

given .
So, we have to find out that power absorbed

or supplied by each of the source, now look
this 8 ampere current, this is the 8 ampere

current it is first you let us start from
this ah from your this element which I have

voltage across it is 5 volt right. So, and
power ah we have to find out p 1 is the power

supplied or absorbed .
So, this 8 ampere current actually this current

actually come leaving the plus terminal right.
Leaving the plus terminal means it is where

your what you call sign will be negative when
power supplied actually right, because this

8 ampere if you look at the direction of the
current this 8 ampere current actually leaving

the plus terminal.
So, p 1 will be your minus 5 into 8 minus

41 that is supplied, look into that, that
8 ampere current is out of the plus terminal

everything I have written for you, but I am
explaining it. So, p 1 will be 5 into minus

8 so, minus 41. So, power supplied now here
so, p 1 is the power supplied .

Now, this 8 ampere current is entering into
the positive terminal, whenever it enters

into the positive terminal means this source
actually absorbing power. So, in this case

it is 2 volt and 8 ampere. So, p 2 will be
8 into 2, 16 watt that is power absorbed.

So, if you look into that 8 ampere current
is entering the plus terminal of p 2 . So,

p 2 will be 2 into 8, 16 watt power absorbed
right .

Now, next is the 3 ampere now here in here
it is now this 8 ampere, current 3 ampere

is going here, 5 ampere is going here. Now
this is a dependent voltage source, now you

see that this is 0.6 I and this is 5 ampere.
So, if you multiply 0.6 into I it will be

3 ampere ah just hold on. So, if it is your
0.6 I so, it will be 0.6 I, I is equal to

here it is 5 ampere. So, it will be 0.6 into
5 so, it will be 3 volt; that means, volt

for I is equal to 5 ampere voltage of the
dependent your dependent voltage source it

is actually is equal to 3 volt right 3 volt
.

Now, this 3 ampere current is entering into
the your what you call positive terminal so,

power is being absorbed . So, it will be 3
ampere in to 3 volt. So, p 3 will be 3 into

3, 9 watt that is absorbed right so, in the
just hold on .

So, in this case . So, . So, in this case
your . So, if you see that p 3 is equal to

your 0.6 into 5 I told you that is 3 volt
into 3 ampere. So, 9 watt power absorbed right

.
So, next is this 5 ampere, this 5 ampere current

entering to the positive terminal right ; that
means, as I entering into the positive terminal

means it is power absorbed. So, it will be
p 4 will be 5 ampere into 3 volt so, 15 watt.

So, p 4 will be 3 into 5 that is 15 watt power
absorbed. So, power supplied is it is taken

minus 40 watt and your power absorbing that
is 16 watt, here it is 9 watt. So, 16 plus

9, 25 here it is plus 15 so, 40 watt . So,
power supplied is minus sign indicates power

supplied. So, supplied is 45, 40 watt and
absorb is also 40 watt so, perfectly matching

. So, now, absorbed as your power supplied
and power absorbed I hope this thing is clear

to you now right .
Next is another example now this is actually

state which interconnects in figure ah 20
are valid and which are invalid you have to

tell, there are 4 connections that which connections
are valid and which connections are in connections

are invalid . Now, take this connection 1
here, the volt this is terminal 1 and terminal

2. So, across terminal 1 2 that is voltage
sources connect V is equal to 5 volt, now

when across 1 2 also it dependent voltage
source is connected V s is equal to 4 V. So,

if you put 5 V of V is equal to 5. So, V s
will be 4 into 5 so, 20 volt so, but across

the it is your across the say your ah 1 2
same terminal you cannot connect 2 different

voltage source. So, this is an invalid connection
so, this is invalid connection .

Now, if you come to this one here, V is equal
to 5 volt and is equal to 2 into V. So, is

V is 5 volt. So, is basically 2 into 5; that
means, your 10 ampere. So, it is a valid circuit

connection there, even voltage source is there,
one dependent current sources. So, this is

a valid connection so, but this is invalid
connection.

Now here if you come here a current source
is given is equal to 2 ampere, but it dependent

voltage source V s is equal to 4 is , but
this is equal to 2 ampere. So, V s is equal

to 4 into 2 8 volt. So, it is a current source
it is a dependent voltage source, there is

series actually later we will see that. So,
it is a valid connection this is a valid connection

at they are connected across terminal 1 2
so, it is a valid connection .

Now, this one a current source is there is
i s equal to 3 ampere and a dependent current

source is there where i x is equal to 3 into
i s. Now when i s is equal to all I am not

writing I am telling from my mouth I think
it is understandable to a simple thing . So,

i s is equal to 3 ampere so, i x i is equal
to 3 into 3 so, 9 ampere, but this is 3 ampere

and this is coming 9 ampere. So, it is not
possible right so, this is an invalid circuit.

So, this circuit this one invalid and this
one is invalid and this 2 are valid circuit,

b and c are valid circuit connection and a
and d these are invalid connections right.

So, hope it is understandable to you because
the why I have taken this one . So, at the

starting from the beginning we have to know
all these things because later stage we have

to solve different type of problem. So, staring
from the beginning we have to clear our you

know ideas .
So, all these things I have written here , but

later you can go through these ah, when you
will go through the bleed your you can go

through ones, but I have explain that exactly
what 

it is right . So, everything I have written
here, but I have explain. So, not for that

ah your what you call going through this .
Now, this one now determine the power supplied

that absorbed by is component in figure 1.21,
but I am telling 1.21 . That is chapter 1.21

figures I am telling figure 21 . So, here
1, 2, 3, 4, ah 4 elements are there and current

is I this 10 ampere this I actually is equal
to 10 ampere. So, this is I, this is your

I right and this I is equal to actually 10
ampere . So, this I is equal to 10 ampere,

this I is equal to 10 ampere .
Now, this ah your what you call this I 10

ampere, this is leaving the terminal this
one this 16 volt source just hold on this

ah your this is 16 volt source. So, 10 ampere
current is leaving the terminal your what

you call positive terminal so; that means,
power supplied, as you leaving this power

this thing. So, this is 16 volt source here
and this is your ah sorry this is 16 volt

and this is actually current source plus minus
this voltage across this is 16 volt . So,

this is a current source.
So, 10 ampere current it is entering into

this your what you call this ah negative terminal
of 6 volt . So, this is a current source and

voltage across this is 16 volt this is a current
source ah I have over looked actually it is

a current source and this is a voltage this
is a voltage source, this is a voltage source

and this is a dependent current source .
So, in this case and across this voltage is

16 volt, then first we have to find out p
4, p 4 is there p 2, p this is p 1, this is

actually p 1, just hold on let me correct
this is actually your p 1 right this is p

1 . So, just hold on . So, this is p 1 I have
corrected that. So, now, this current source

so, it is actually supplying power because
it is leaving this terminal. So, p 1 will

is equal to 6 it will be ah minus 16 into
10.

So, minus 160 watt. So, p 1 is equal to 16
into minus 10 minus this is power supplied

right . Now, next is if you look into this,
this 10 ampere current entering the negative

terminal other way actually it is leaving
the current leaving the plus terminal, because

this is entering a minus terminal ok, but
because either entering minus terminal or

leaving the plus terminal; that means, 6 volt
also it is supplying power because this is

the direction of the current if current is
flowing this direction. So, basically this

current entering to the minus terminal leaving
the plus terminal. So, p 2 actually this shows

actually your what you call it is supplying
power. So, it will be minus sign right .

So, in that case p 2 will be 6 into minus
10 minus 60 watt power supplied . So, this

is your 6 into minus 10 ah this is the 10
ampere current source say is that current

source supplying 10 ampere current here this
current is 10 ampere so, it is minus 60 watt.

Now, next is this 6 ampere another 6 ampere
current entering into this 22 volt source

. So, it is it is entering into the positive
terminal. So, as it is entering into a positive

terminal means this voltage source actually
this source actually is absorbing this absorbing

power. So, it will be p 3 will be 22 into
6 so, it will be 132 watt.

So, p 3 will be your 22 into 6, 132 watt so,
power absorbed right . Next is that, this

is your another your dependent ah current
source . So, here your what you call here

0.4 I. So, I is equal to 10 ampere just hold
on I am writing for you.

So, 0.4 I so, this is your ah 0.4 and I is
equal to 10, so, this is actually 4 volt right

this is 4 volt. And this one your this is
actually plus terminal, this is minus terminal

right. So, this is at this actually this is
a this is an wire only this is a wire only.

So, plus minus means here it is plus, here
it is minus ; that means, here it is plus,

here it is minus, when this is plus actually
this is minus; that means, the direction of

the current is this way so; that means, current
is actually entering into the positive terminal

. That means, this source this dependent current
source actually absorbing power I hope you

are understanding will be clear loop this
is plus minus; that means, this is plus, this

is minus .
And this ah your current direction is this

way. So, this plus this is plus minus means
this is also plus, this is also minus and

this is the direction of the current; that
means, current is entering into the positive

terminal because this is positive terminal
; that means, this show and this here it is

your what you call here, it is ah this is
your current source sorry this is 4 into 10

it is ah your 4 ampere sorry it is current
source. So, it is 4 ampere right, ah it is

ah ah 4 ampere sorry right.
So, this is your 4 ampere, now what is the

voltage. So, no other electrical element is
there. So, across this across this current

source the voltage is also 22 volt because
here it is across this is 22 volt. So, same

voltage will be impressed across this your
this ah your dependent current source .

So, this is actually your 4 ampere so; that
means, 22 into 4 the power absorbed by this

source will be 88 watt. So, if you just hold
on . So, I am ah deleting this one right just

hold on right . So, if you come to this, that
is your this is your actually this is p 4

. So, this is actually your p 4 is equal to
look 22 into that 0.4 into 10 4 ampere. So,

88 watts so, power absorbed.
Now, if you add 132 and your 88 this is power

absorbed whatever it will come 220 or so,
right and if you see the power supplied it

is 160 minus and minus 60 so, minus 220. So,
it is exactly matching . So, this way you

have to understand I hope you have understood
this because no other element. So, whatever

22 volt is there that will be impressed across
this dependent current source.

And I is equal to your 10 amperes so, it is
4 into I so, 4 ampere and voltage across this

your dependent current source is 22 volt.
So, 22 into 4 because whatever volt I told

you just now that to showing polarity sign.
So, this way you can I means just you have

just we have to your what you call, we have
to clear our concept about all this things

.
Then only we can we can solve things easily.

So, there should not be any path for confusion
or anything even when I am writing also one

or two places I am over looping your what
you call over loop looking on this, but this

is current source it will be 4 ampere. So,
[laughter] by mistake I wrote 4 volt so, it

is ah your what you call this . So, this is
your 4 ampere. So, I hope it is understandable

to you right .
So, next one you look. So, right so, next

one is ah this is these are the very small
thing ah, but very tricky ah when you are

starting your ah learning this course . So,
if you clear our concept about this you will

find things are very interesting in the later
stage right .

So, for example, figure 22 shows a circuit
diagram determine the power supplied or absorbed

by the voltage source, but first one it is
given V is equal to 1 volt and I is equal

to 2 ampere you have to find out that power
supplied or absorbed by the voltage source;

that means, this voltage source right. So,
first one is given V 1 is equal to 1 volt

and I is equal to 2 ampere .
So, when I is equal to 2 ampere right, when

I is equal to 2 ampere. So, I is equal to
2 ampere right 2 ampere [vocalized-noise and

this is the direction of the current, this
is the direction of the current ; that means,

the current actually flowing like this; that
means, this current actually entering into

this per your plus terminal ; that means,
the voltage source actually this is actually

it absorbed power because it is a entering
into the positive terminal that means, but

voltage is 1 volt .
So, V is equal to it is given for this case

1 volt and I is equal to is given your 2 ampere
2 ampere. So, it will be 2 into 1 that is

2 watt power absorbed by the voltage source.
So, here I have so, this is actually just

hold on I . So, I am rubbing this. So, it
will be power absorbed by the voltage source

. So, just hold on right. So, this one your
this is the 2 watt the power absorbed .

Now, next one it is given look the V is equal
to 6 volt, but I is equal to minus 4 ampere.

So, in this circuit I am I am drawing it again
for your understanding it is the case b, it

is the for this case this is case b . So,
V is equal to 6 volt , but your current is

I is equal to minus 4 ampere ; that means,
the direction of the current will be reverse

so; that means, if I for yours ah understanding
if I draw it like this .

If I draw it like this the because I is equal
to minus 4. So, in this direction so, I making

this arrow this direction and this is your
voltage source, voltage is 6 volt . So, V

is equal to 6 volts second case it is in the
second case V is equal to 6 volt and I is

minus 4 ampere this direction; that means,
this direction I is equal to I can write positive

4 ampere and this current actually is flowing
like this it is flowing like this ; that means,

the current actually leaving the voltage terminal
because it is direction is like this .

So, basically the current actually leaving
the your plus terminal; that means, your power,

power will be your I is given 4 ampere and
voltage is 6 volt. So, p it will be 24 watt

, but it is leaving the plus terminal; that
means, power supplied. So, minus 24 so, power

supplied by the voltage source right. So,
that so, let me clean this one again I will

be back to you right. So, just hold on so,
if you come to this your this is your p is

equal to VI power supplied the second case
right.

Now, third case it is given that v is equal
to minus 12 volt and I is equal to minus 16

ampere . So, in this case just for your understanding
again I will draw the for the case c. So,

this is your ah just hold on this is your
case c it is V is equal to minus 12 and I

is equal to minus 16 ampere. So, what you
can do the easiest way, rather than complicating

the thing .
So, this is my current source right as I is

equal to minus 16 ampere. So, direction of
I is given. So, this is the positive dire

I is when I is positive this is the direction
is given, it is minus 16 means you just make

the arrow downwards right and this one your
voltage also voltage source also it is given

minus 12 volt. So, this one if you make minus
and this is make plus so; that means, voltage

is equal to we can write 12 volt and this
is your I, I is equal to you write your 16

ampere, what I did for your understanding
as V is equal to minus 12 volt I have reverse

the direction of the current because it is
sorry I is equal to minus 16 ampere. So, I

have reverse the direction of the current
and V is equal to minus 12 volts. So, I have

reverse the polarity .
So; that means, the current is flowing in

this direction current is flowing in this
direction; that means, the current actually

entering into the positive terminal of the
voltage source ; that means, it is absorbing

power. So, p will be is equal to your 16 into
12 watt this power it is being absorbed by

this voltage source because it is entering
into the positive terminal right.

So, it will be actually 192 watt right. So,
I hope you have got it this right. So, make

things simpler way to better we should not
make the thing complicated way . So, make

the things simplest way such that you will
understand each and every thing ok. Then now

let me clean this one . So, that is why the
all calculation I have made this power absorbed

192 watt everything is here, but ah everything
I am trying to make it for you .

Then this figure this is for example, 17 now
figure 27 sources circuit diagram determine

p 1 and p 2 for I is equal to 4 ampere and
I is equal to minus 3 ampere right. So, when

I is equal to this is a your dependent voltage
source, this is a dependent voltage source

and first case is I is equal to 4 ampere . So,
first case that I equal to 4 ampere right

and it is a dependent voltage source. So,
this it is 2 I so, here voltage will be 2

into your 4 because first case this case it
is I is equal to 4 ampere.

So, in this case what will happen that, this
is your 2 into 4 this is volt ; that means,

it is 8 volt right and this I is equal to
4 ampere this current actually entering into

the positive terminal of this dependent voltage
source ; that means, your; that means, this

4 I this I is equal to 4 ampere first leaving
this voltage leaving this plus terminal; that

means, when you leaving the plus terminal;
that means, voltage p 1 that is the 8 volt

source it is actually supplying power .
So, when it is leaving the plus terminal it

will be minus and voltage is V is equal to
8 into I is equal to your 4 ampere this is

the 4 ampere. So, minus 4 so, this will be
minus 32 watt right this is the power supplied

right, this is power supplied.
Now, the another thing is this current is

entering into the dependent voltage source
the plus terminal; that means, this source

actually absorbing power . So, here it is
8 volt and 4 ampere current is entering because

I is equal to 4. So, it will be p 2 will is
equal to 8 into 4 so, 32 watt. So, this is

actually power absorbed right. So, hope this
thing is totally clear to you so, let me clean

this right.
Second case I is equal to minus 3 ampere just

tell me one thing this one second case this
one please do not read I am I am striking

it off right, second case ah your this one
the second case this do not read here it is

that calculation here, it is wrong this do
not read. I will explain what exactly this

one you should not read, the second case I
am explaining on this your what you call on

ah that on the problem itself just hold on.
So, this you should not read for the second

case right .
So, now I am going back to that problem, let

me clean this ah . So, just hold on . So,
second case your, I is equal to your minus

3 ampere, now what will happen, if I is equal
to minus 3 ampere . So, what I will do I will

redraw the circuit . So, in this case ah just
hold on so, in this case that I is equal to

minus 3 ampere.
So, what I will do, this is dependent voltage

source, this is plus minus, this is your sorry
this is your voltage source, this is plus,

this is minus 8 volt source, this is the current
source right and as it is I is equal to minus

3 ampere. So, a delete siring upwards as it
is minus 3. So, we have taking this direction

say I is equal to 3 ampere and this is my
8 volt and this is your 2 I right this is

dependent voltage source .
Now, in this case here it will be 2 into 3

that is equal to 6 volt right, now this is
8 volt. So, if you look into that this ah

3 ampere current actually if current is moving
like this moving like this. So, 3 ampere current

is this is actually p 1 and this is your p
2 . So, in this case 3 ampere current entering

into the your what you call positive terminal
of this voltage source so; that means, power

absorbed by this voltage source this is p
1. So, p 1 will be is equal to 8 volt into

that 3 is equal to 24 watt right 24 watt.
So, this power absorbed .

Now, and in this case for dependent voltage
source this actually leaving the plus terminal

so, p 2 will be negative power supplied and
p 2 will be is equal to your this is minus

ah minus sign power supplied. So, it is 6
volt 2 into 3 dependent voltage source 6 volt

it is 6 ah into this 3 . So, it is minus 18
watt this is actually what you call the power

supplied by the, this is absorbed and this
is minus sign means power supplied .

So, if you add these 24 minus 8 18 algebraic
sum . So, 6 difference is there my question

is to you power balance has to be matched
because absorbed power plus your ah supplied

power is equal to 0, but here it is 24 minus
18 6 watt. So, ah difference is there where

that power has gone .
So, just hint is that you calculate I am not

telling, this source actually is supplying
another 6 watt power right this current source

then only it will match. So, you find out
from where you will get this 6 watt, this

is an example this is a your what you call
problem for you should solve this one right

.
So, at a so, I am ah. So, this is the problem

actually. So, whatever I have rubbed it there
do not go through this is the problem . So,

6 differences is there I am telling you this
current source actually supplying 6 watt,

but you calculate from how 6 if that 6 watt
you calculate from your said the how can you

calculate that I will not tell here, but it
is an exercise for you right

So, I am let me clean this. So, do not see
that one . So, now, this one you have to tell

which is ah we are what you call valid connection
and which is invalid connection that is the

thing look this is 1 2 terminal. So, across
this 10 volt this is also 10 volt. So, this

two sources are connected actually in parallel
later we will see . So, this is a valid connection

right because 10 volt 10 volt valid connection.
Now, here one 5 ampere ah current source is

there a 10 voltage 10 another 10 both are
connected across terminal 1 2 absolutely no

problem this is also a valid connection right.
This two are valid connection because any

across any terminal you can only connect the
equal voltage source if there is a difference

is then that is invalid connection that is
not possible and any current source and this

voltage source this is also a valid connection.
Now, this one across this terminal 1 2 this

is a 5 volt and this is a 10 volt it cannot
be 2 cannot be different right it has to be

same because they are connected across the
same terminal . So, this is invalid connection.

Similarly, this 1 2 ampere currents ah source
and another 5 ampere in the same it is not

valid because it is a simple circuit. So,
this is invalid connection this is invalid

connection here it is invalid 5 ampere here
it is 2 ampere it is not possible . So, because

a 5 ampere 2 ampere cannot flow like this
I write the either it has to be 2 or it has

to be your what you call ah this 5, but both
the way we have connected it is invalid connection

similarly here also it is invalids connection.
So, a b are valid connection c d are invalid

connection. So, everything written there everything
is written there. So, just you will jus you

will go through . Now, these are all exercise.
So, exercise 1 answers are given not reading

again when you will ah read this video you
can pause and see this problem . So, your

ah this is problem 2 so, answers are given
hope these all answers are correct you will

solve it, now problem 3 .
So, this is ah also your powers absorbed power

supplied problem right. So, all answers are
given and problem 4. This is also given the

total charge entering ah the element this
is also answers given . So, this is problem

5 . So, we will do this all valid or invalid
connections so, you will solve this one right.

So, this is one then and answer for everything,
this is a valid or invalid connection it is

actually ah circuit inside the box absorbing
or supplying power right . Everything is given

you read this problem very carefully very
carefully and do this a b c all the all the

c d 4 connections are there .
Accordingly we will make it answers are also

given right. And problem 6 this is your voltage
your voltage 0 for say time varying voltage

actually given . So, you have to find out
the energy delivered answer is given . So,

this is there are 5 connections there, you
have to see that ah whether how many of them

are valid or invalid right this is there are
5 connections and all answers are given .

And this is also a time varying we will see
for a ac circuit, but this is simply given

you have to find out the energy the joule
absorbed right . And this is another simple

problem right you have to find out that that
ah you have to just ah answer is given right,

that stove element this much when connected
to a this long ah how long does it take to

consume 30000 joules. So, answer is given
and this is the last one .

This is the current ah time varying your what
you call current is given right you have to

find out total passed charge through the element
right and these answers are given. So, everything

is given.
Thank you very much we will be back again

.

